
Jos 1:1 When Moses, servant of Yahweh, was dead, Yahweh spoke to Joshua son of Nun, Moses’ adjutant. He 
said, 

Jos 1:2 “Moses my servant is dead; go now and cross this Jordan, you and this whole people, into the country 
which I am giving to them (the Israelites). 

Jos 1 :3 Every place you tread with the soles of your feet I shall give you, as I declared to Moses that I would. 

Jos 1 :4 From the desert and the Lebanon, to the Great River, the Euphrates (the entire country of the Hittites), 
and as far as the Great Sea to westward, is to be your territory. 

Jos 1 :5 As long as you live, no one will be able to resist you; I shall be with you as I was with Moses; I shall not 
fail you or desert you. 

Jos 1 :6 “Be strong and stand firm, for you are the man to give this people possession of the land which I swore 
to their ancestors that I would give them. 

Jos 1 :7 Only be strong and stand very firm and be careful to keep the whole Law which my servant Moses laid 
down for you. Do not swerve from this either to right or to left, and then you will succeed wherever you go. 

Jos 1 :8 Have the book of this Law always on your lips; meditate on it day and night, so that you may carefully 
keep everything that is written in it. Then your undertakings will prosper, then you will have success. 

Jos 1 :9 Have I not told you: Be strong and stand firm? Be fearless and undaunted, for go where you may, 
Yahweh your God is with you”. 

Jos 1:10 Joshua then gave the people’s officials this instruction: 

Jos 1:11 “Go through the camp and give the people this order, ‘Make provisions ready, for in three days’ time 
you will cross this Jordan and go on to take possession of the land which Yahweh your God is giving you as your 
own’”. 

Jos 1:12 Joshua then said to the Reubenites and Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, 

Jos 1:13 “Remember the order given you by Moses, servant of Yahweh: Yahweh your God, in bringing you to 
rest, has given you the land where we are. 

Jos 1:14 Your wives, your little ones and your cattle must stay in the country given you by Moses beyond the 
Jordan. But all you fighting men must cross in battle formation at the head of your brothers and help them, 

Jos 1:15 until Yahweh grants rest to your brothers and you alike, when they too have taken possession of the 
land which Yahweh your God is giving to them. Then you may go back and take possession of the land which 
belongs to you and which Moses, servant of Yahweh, has given you on the eastern side of the Jordan”. 

Jos 1:16 They answered Joshua, “We will do whatever you order us, and wherever you send us we will go. 

Jos 1:17 We obeyed Moses in everything, and now we will obey you. Only may Yahweh your God be with you 
as he was with Moses! 



Jos 1:18 If anyone rebels against your orders or will not listen to your commands, let him be put to death. Only 
be strong and stand firm”. 

Jos 2:1 From Shittim, Joshua son of Nun secretly sent two men to reconnoitre. He said, “Go and explore the 
country and Jericho”. They left; they went into the house of a prostitute called Rahab, to spend the night there. 
Jos 2:2 The king of Jericho was told, “Some men have come here tonight from the Israelites, to reconnoitre the 
country”. 

Jos 2:3 The king of Jericho then sent a message to Rahab, “Send out the men who came to you and are lodging 
in your house, for they have come to reconnoitre the whole country”. 

Jos 2:4 But the woman took the two men and hid them. “It is true”, she said, “the men did come to me, but I did 
not know where they came from. 

Jos 2:5 When the city gate was about to be closed at nightfall, the men went out and I cannot say where they 
have gone. Follow them quickly and you will overtake them”. 

Jos 2:6 She had taken them up to the roof and hidden them under some stalks of flax which she had laid out 
there. 

Jos 2:7 The men hurried in pursuit of them towards the Jordan, as far as the fords, and the gate was shut once 
the pursuers had gone through. 

Jos 2:8 The two men had not yet settled down for the night when Rahab came up to them on the roof. 

Jos 2:9 She said to them, “I know that Yahweh has given you this country, that we are afraid of you and that 
everyone living in this country has been seized with terror at your approach; 

Jos 2:10 for we have heard how Yahweh dried up the Sea of Reeds before you when you came out of Egypt 
and what you did to the two Amorite kings across the Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom you put under the curse of 
destruction. 

Jos 2:1 1 When we heard this, our hearts failed us, and now no one has any courage left to resist you, since 
Yahweh your God is God both in heaven above and on earth beneath. 

Jos 2:12 So, swear to me now by Yahweh, since I have been kind to you, 

Jos 2:13 that you in your turn will be kind to my father’s family; and give me a sure sign of this: that you will 
spare the lives of my father and mother, my brothers and sisters and all who belong to them, and will preserve 
us from death”. 

Jos 2:14 The men replied, “We pledge you our lives, provided that you say nothing about our mission. When 
Yahweh has given us the country, we shall treat you kindly and faithfully”. 

Jos 2:15 She then let them down from the window on a rope, as her house was against the city wall and she 
actually lived in the wall. 

Jos 2:16 “Make for the hills”, she said, “or you may run into your pursuers. Hide there for three days, until your 
pursuers have come back, and then go on your way”. 

Jos 2:17 The men said, “This is how we shall fulfil the oath which you have made us swear: 

Jos 2:18 when we invade the country, you must tie this scarlet cord to the window from which you let us down, 
and collect your father, mother, brothers and entire family inside your house. 

Jos 2:19 If anyone goes out of the doors of your house into the street, his blood will be on his own head and we 
shall not be to blame; but the blood of all staying inside the house with you will be on our heads if a hand is laid 
on any of them. 

Jos 2:20 But if you divulge our mission in the meanwhile, we shall be free of the oath which you have made us 
swear”. 

Jos 2:21 She replied, “Let it be as you say”. She let them go, and they left. She then tied the scarlet cord to the 
window. 

Jos 2:22 They left and made for the hills. They stayed there for three days, until their pursuers had gone home, 
having scoured the countryside without finding them. 

Jos 2:23 The two men then came down again from the hills, crossed over and, going to Joshua son of Nun, told 
him everything that had happened to them. 

Jos 2:24 To Joshua they said, “Yahweh has put the whole country at our mercy, and its inhabitants are all panic- 
stricken at our approach”. 

Jos 3:1 Early in the morning, Joshua struck camp and set out from Shittim with all the Israelites. They went as 
far as the Jordan and there they camped before they crossed. 

Jos 3:2 Three days later, the officials went through the camp 

Jos 3:3 and gave the people these instructions, “When you see the ark of the covenant of Yahweh your God 
being carried by the levitical priests, you will leave your position and follow it, so that you may know which way to 
take, since you have never gone this way before. 

Jos 3:4 Between you and the ark, however, keep a distance of about two thousand cubits: do not go near it”. 

Jos 3:5 Joshua said to the people, “Sanctify yourselves, since tomorrow Yahweh will work wonders among you”. 
Jos 3:6 Joshua then said to the priests, “Take up the ark of the covenant and cross at the head of the people”. 



They took up the ark of the covenant and moved to the head of the people. 

Jos 3:7 Yahweh said to Joshua, “This very day, I shall begin to make you great in the eyes of all Israel so that 
they will know that, as I was with Moses, so I shall be with you. 

Jos 3:8 Now, give this order to the priests carrying the ark of the covenant, ‘When you have reached the brink 
of the waters of the Jordan, you must halt in the Jordan itself’”. 

Jos 3:9 To the Israelites, Joshua then said, “Come closer and hear the words of Yahweh your God”. 

Jos 3:10 Joshua said, “By this, you are to know that the living God is with you and without a doubt will expel the 
Canaanites, the Hittites, the Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Amorites and Jebusites before you. 

Jos 3:1 1 Look, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of the whole earth is about to move into the Jordan at your 
head. 

Jos 3:12 Now choose twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one man from each tribe. 

Jos 3:13 As soon as the priests carrying the ark of Yahweh, Lord of the whole earth, have set the soles of their 
feet in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan will be cut off; the upper waters flowing down will stop 
as a single mass”. 

Jos 3:14 Accordingly, when the people left their tents to cross the Jordan, the priests carried the ark of the 
covenant ahead of the people. 

Jos 3:15 As soon as the bearers of the ark reached the Jordan and the feet of the priests carrying the ark 
touched the waters — the Jordan is in spate throughout the harvest season- 

Jos 3:16 the upper waters stood still and formed a single mass over a great distance, at Adam, the town near 
Zarethan, while those flowing down to the Sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, were completely separated. The 
people crossed opposite Jericho. 

Jos 3:17 The priests carrying the ark of the covenant of Yahweh stood firm on dry ground in mid-Jordan, while 
all Israel crossed on dry ground, until the whole nation had completed its crossing of the Jordan. 

Jos 4:1 When the whole nation had finished crossing the Jordan, Yahweh spoke to Joshua and said, 

Jos 4:2 “Choose twelve men from the people, one man from each tribe, and give them this order, 

Jos 4:3 ‘Here, from mid-Jordan, from the place where the priests’ feet were standing, take twelve stones; carry 
them with you and set them down in the camp where you pass the night’”. 

Jos 4:4 Joshua called the twelve men whom he had selected from the Israelites, one man from each tribe, 

Jos 4:5 and Joshua said to them, “Go on ahead of the ark of Yahweh your God into mid-Jordan, and each of 
you take one stone on his shoulder, corresponding to the number of the tribes of Israel, 

Jos 4:6 to make this a sign among you; and when, in the future, your children ask you, ‘What do these stones 
mean for you?’. 

Jos 4:7 you will then tell them, ‘The waters of the Jordan separated before the ark of the covenant of Yahweh; 
when it crossed the Jordan, the waters of the river separated. These stones are an everlasting reminder of this 
to the Israelites’. 

Jos 4:8 The Israelites did as Joshua ordered; they took twelve stones from mid-Jordan corresponding to the 
number of the tribes of Israel, as Yahweh had told Joshua; they carried them over to the camp and set them 
down there. 

Jos 4:9 Joshua then erected twelve stones in mid-Jordan, on the spot where the feet of the priests carrying the 
ark of the covenant had stood; and they are still there today. 

Jos 4:10 The priests carrying the ark stood still in mid-Jordan, until everything had been done that Yahweh had 
ordered Joshua to tell the people (in accordance with everything that Moses had ordered Joshua); and the 
people hurried across. 

Jos 4:11 When the people had finished crossing, the ark of Yahweh then crossed, with the priests, to the head 
of the people. 

Jos 4:12 The sons of Reuben, the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh crossed in battle formation at the 
head of the Israelites, as Moses had told them. 

Jos 4:13 Some forty thousand warriors in arms, they crossed in Yahweh’s presence, ready for battle, towards 
the plain of Jericho. 

Jos 4:14 That day, Yahweh made Joshua great in the eyes of all Israel, who respected him as they had 
respected Moses, as long as he lived. 

Jos 4:15 Yahweh said to Joshua, 

Jos 4:16 “Order the priests carrying the ark of the Testimony to come up out of the Jordan”. 

Jos 4:17 And Joshua gave the order to the priests, “Come up, out of the Jordan!”. 

Jos 4:18 Now, when the priests carrying the ark of the covenant of Yahweh came up out of mid-Jordan, no 
sooner had the soles of the priests’ feet touched solid ground, than the waters of the Jordan returned to their bed 
and ran on, in spate as before. 

Jos 4:19 It was the tenth day of the first month when the people came up from the Jordan and made their camp 
at Gilgal, on the eastern border of Jericho. 



Jos 4:20 As regards those twelve stones, which they had taken from the Jordan, Joshua set them up at Gilgal. 
Jos 4:21 He then said to the Israelites, “When, in the future, your children ask their fathers, ‘What are these 
stones?’. 

Jos 4:22 you will explain to your children, ‘Israel crossed this Jordan dry-shod. 

Jos 4:23 For Yahweh your God dried up the waters of the Jordan in front of you until you had crossed, just as 
Yahweh your God did to the Sea of Reeds, which he dried up before us until we had crossed it; 

Jos 4:24 so that all the peoples of the earth may know how mighty the hand of Yahweh is, and always stand in 
awe of Yahweh your God’”. 

Jos 5:1 When all the kings of the Amorites living to westward across the Jordan, and all the kings of the 
Canaanites living on the seaboard, heard that Yahweh had dried up the waters of the Jordan before the 
Israelites until they had crossed, their hearts failed and they lost all courage to resist the Israelites. 

Jos 5:2 At this time Yahweh said to Joshua, “Make flint knives and circumcise the Israelites again (a second 
time). 

Jos 5:3 Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the Israelites on the Hill of Foreskins. 

Jos 5:4 The reason why Joshua circumcised them was this. All the males of the people who had come out of 
Egypt of age to bear arms had died in the desert on their journey after leaving Egypt. 

Jos 5:5 Now, all the people who came out had been circumcised; but none of those born in the desert, during 
the journey, after leaving Egypt, had been circumcised; 

Jos 5:6 for the Israelites walked the desert for forty years, until the whole nation had died out, that is, the men 
who had come out of Egypt of age to bear arms; they had not obeyed the voice of Yahweh, and Yahweh had 
sworn to them never to let them see the land which he had sworn to their ancestors that he would give us, a land 
flowing with milk and honey. 

Jos 5:7 But in place of these he set their sons, and these were the ones whom Joshua circumcised: they were 
uncircumcised because they had not been circumcised during the journey. 

Jos 5:8 When the circumcising of the whole nation was finished, they stayed resting in the camp till they were 
well again. 

Jos 5:9 Yahweh then said to Joshua, “Today I have taken the shame of Egypt away from you”. Hence, the place 
has been called Gilgal ever since. 

Jos 5:10 The Israelites pitched their camp at Gilgal and kept the Passover there on the fourteenth day of the 
month, at evening, in the plain of Jericho. 

Jos 5:1 1 On the very next day after the Passover, they ate what the land produced, unleavened bread and 
roasted ears of corn. 

Jos 5:12 The manna stopped the day after they had eaten the produce of the land. The Israelites from that year 
onwards ate the produce of Canaan and had no more manna. 

Jos 5:13 Now when Joshua was near Jericho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him, grasping a 
naked sword. Joshua walked towards him and said to him, “Are you on our side or on that of our enemies?”. 

Jos 5:14 He replied, “On neither side. I have come now as the captain of the army of Yahweh”. Joshua fell on his 
face to the ground, worshipping him, and said, “What has my Lord to say to his servant?”. 

Jos 5:15 The captain of the army of Yahweh answered Joshua, “Take your sandals off your feet, for the place 
where you are standing is holy”. And Joshua did so. 

Jos 6:1 Now, Jericho had shut and barricaded its gates (against the Israelites): no one came out and no one 
went in. 

Jos 6:2 Yahweh then said to Joshua, “Look, I am putting Jericho, its picked troops and its king, at your mercy. 
Jos 6:3 All you warriors must march round the city (go right round the city once, doing the same on six 
successive days. 

Jos 6:4 Seven priests must carry seven ram's-horn trumpets in front of the ark. On the seventh day, you will go 
seven times round the city and the priests will blow their trumpets). 

Jos 6:5 When the ram’s horn sounds (when you hear the sound of the trumpet), the entire people must utter a 
mighty war cry and the city wall will collapse then and there; the people will then go into the assault, each man 
straight ahead”. 

Jos 6:6 Joshua son of Nun summoned the priests and said to them, “Take up the ark of the covenant, and let 
seven priests carry seven ram's-horn trumpets ahead of the ark of Yahweh”. 

Jos 6:7 To the people he then said, “Forward! March round the city, and let the vanguard march ahead of the 
ark of Yahweh!”. 

Jos 6:8 (Everything was done as Joshua had given orders to the people.) Seven priests, carrying seven ram's- 
horn trumpets ahead of Yahweh, moved forward blowing their trumpets; the ark of the covenant of Yahweh 
came behind them, 

Jos 6:9 the vanguard marched ahead of the priests, who blew their trumpets, the rearguard followed behind the 
ark; the men marched, the trumpets sounded. 



Jos 6:10 Joshua had given the people the following orders, “Do not raise a war cry, do not let your voice be 
heard (not a word must pass your lips), until the day when I say, ‘Raise the war cry’. That is when you must 
raise the war cry”. 

Jos 6:1 1 He made the ark go round the city (going round it once), then they went back to camp, where they 
spent the night. 

Jos 6:12 Joshua got up early, and the priests took up the ark of Yahweh. 

Jos 6:13 Carrying the seven ram's-horn trumpets, the seven priests walked ahead of the ark of Yahweh, 
blowing their trumpets as they went, while the vanguard marched ahead of them and the rearguard behind the 
ark of Yahweh, and the march went on to the sound of the trumpet. 

Jos 6:14 They marched once round the city (on the second day) and went back to camp; and so on for six days. 
Jos 6:15 On the seventh day, they got up at dawn and marched (in the same manner) round the city seven 
times. (This was the only day when they marched round the city seven times.) 

Jos 6:16 At the seventh time, the priests blew their trumpets and Joshua said to the people, “Raise the war cry, 
for Yahweh has given you the city! 

Jos 6:17 “The city and everyone in it must be devoted to Yahweh under the curse of destruction; the life of 
Rahab the prostitute alone must be spared, with all those with her in her house, since she hid the messengers 
we sent. 

Jos 6:18 But beware of the curse of destruction, yourselves, for fear that, moved by greed, you take something 
lying under the curse; that would put the camp of Israel under the same curse and bring disaster on it. 

Jos 6:19 All the silver and all the gold, everything made of bronze or iron, will be consecrated to Yahweh and 
put in his treasury”. 

Jos 6:20 The people raised the war cry, the trumpets sounded. When the people heard the sound of the 
trumpet, they raised a mighty war cry and the wall collapsed then and there. At once the people stormed the city, 
each man going straight forward; and they captured the city. 

Jos 6:21 They enforced the curse of destruction on everyone in the city: men and women, young and old, 
including the oxen, the sheep and the donkeys, slaughtering them all. 

Jos 6:22 Joshua said to the two men who had reconnoitred the country, “Go into the prostitute’s house, and 
bring the woman out with all who belong to her, as you swore to her that you would”. 

Jos 6:23 The young men who had been spies went and brought Rahab out, with her father and mother and 
brothers and all who belonged to her. They brought out all her clansmen too, and put them in a place of safety 
outside the camp of Israel. 

Jos 6:24 They burned the city and everything inside it, except the silver, the gold and the things of bronze and 
iron; these they put into the treasury of Yahweh’s house. 

Jos 6:25 But Rahab the prostitute, her father’s family and all who belonged to her, these Joshua spared. She is 
still living in Israel even today, for having hidden the messengers whom Joshua sent to reconnoitre Jericho. 

Jos 6:26 At that time Joshua made them take this oath before Yahweh: Accursed before Yahweh be the man 
who rises up and rebuilds this city (Jericho)! On his first-born will he lay its foundations, on his youngest son set 
up its gates! 

Jos 6:27 So Yahweh was with Joshua, whose fame spread throughout the country. 

Jos 7:1 But the Israelites were unfaithful to the curse of destruction. Achan son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of 
Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took something that fell under the curse of destruction, and the anger of Yahweh 
was aroused against the Israelites. 

Jos 7:2 Now Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai (which is near Beth-Aven), to the east of Bethel, having said to 
them, “Go up and reconnoitre the country”. They went up and reconnoitred Ai. 

Jos 7:3 Coming back to Joshua, they said, “There is no need for the whole people to go up; let some two or 
three thousand go and attack Ai. Spare the whole people such an effort; there are only a few of them!”. 

Jos 7:4 Of the people, some three thousand marched up, but these broke before the people of Ai, 

Jos 7:5 who killed some thirty-six of them and pursued them from the town gate as far as Shebarim, and on the 
slope cut them to pieces. The hearts of the people melted away and turned to water. 

Jos 7:6 Joshua then tore his clothes and prostrated himself before the ark of Yahweh till nightfall; the elders of 
Israel did the same, and all poured dust on their heads. 

Jos 7:7 And Joshua said, “Alas, Lord Yahweh, why did you bother to bring this nation across the Jordan, if it was 
only to put us at the mercy of the Amorites and destroy us? If only we could have settled down on the other side 
of the Jordan! 

Jos 7:8 Forgive me, Lord, but what can I say, now that Israel has turned tail on the enemy? 

Jos 7:9 The Canaanites, all the inhabitants of the land, will hear of it; they will unite against us to wipe our name 
from the earth. And what will you do about your great Name then?”. 

Jos 7:10 Yahweh said to Joshua, “Stand up! Why are you lying prostrate like this? 

Jos 7:1 1 Israel has sinned; they have violated the covenant which I imposed on them. They have gone so far as 



to take what was under the curse of destruction, they have even stolen it; they have actually hidden it; they have 
put it in their baggage. 

Jos 7:12 That is why the Israelites cannot stand up to their foes, why they have turned tail on their enemies: 
because they have come under the curse of destruction themselves. Unless you get rid of the object among you 
which has been put under the curse of destruction, I shall be with you no longer”. 

Jos 7:13 “Get up, sanctify the people and say, ‘Sanctify yourselves for tomorrow, since Yahweh, the God of 
Israel, declares: The curse of destruction has now fallen on you, Israel; you will not be able to stand up to your 
enemies, until you have rid yourselves of that object which has been put under the curse of destruction. 

Jos 7:14 Tomorrow morning, therefore, you will come forward tribe by tribe, and then the tribe which Yahweh 
selects by lot will come forward clan by clan, and the clan which Yahweh selects by lot will come forward family 
by family, and the family which Yahweh selects by lot will come forward man by man. 

Jos 7:15 And the man indicated by lot as regards the object which has been put under the curse of destruction 
will be delivered to the flames, he and all his possessions, for having violated the covenant with Yahweh and for 
having committed an infamy in Israel’”. 

Jos 7:16 Joshua got up early; he made Israel come forward tribe by tribe, and the lot indicated the tribe of 
Judah. 

Jos 7:17 He summoned the clans of Judah, and the lot indicated the clan of Zerah. He summoned the clan of 
Zerah, family by family, and the lot indicated Zabdi. 

Jos 7:18 Joshua then summoned the family of Zabdi, man by man, and the lot indicated Achan son of Carmi, 
son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah. 

Jos 7:19 Joshua then said to Achan, “My son, give glory to Yahweh, God of Israel, and confess; tell me what 
you have done and hide nothing from me”. 

Jos 7:20 Achan replied to Joshua, “Yes, I am the man who has sinned against Yahweh, God of Israel, and this 
is what I have done. 

Jos 7:21 In the loot, I saw a fine robe from Shinar and two hundred shekels of silver and an ingot of gold 
weighing fifty shekels, I set my heart on them and I took them. They are hidden in the ground inside my tent, with 
the silver underneath”. 

Jos 7:22 Joshua sent messengers; they ran to the tent, and the robe was indeed hidden in the tent, with the 
silver underneath. 

Jos 7:23 They took the things out of the tent and, bringing them to Joshua and all the Israelites, laid them out 
before Yahweh. 

Jos 7:24 Joshua then took Achan son of Zerah and led him up to the Vale of Achor, with the silver and the robe 
and the ingot of gold, his sons, his daughters, his oxen, his donkeys, his sheep, his goats, his tent and all his 
belongings. All Israel went with him. 

Jos 7:25 Joshua said, “Why have you brought misfortune on us? Today may Yahweh bring misfortune on you!”. 
And all Israel stoned him to death (and they burned them and threw stones at them). 

Jos 7:26 Over him, they raised a great mound of stones, which is still there today. Yahweh then relented from 
his fierce anger. That was why the place was called the Vale of Achor, as it still is today. 

Jos 8:1 Yahweh then said to Joshua, “Be fearless and undaunted. Take all your fighting men with you. Up! 

March against Ai. Look, I have put the king of Ai, his people, his town and his territory at your mercy. 

Jos 8:2 You must treat Ai and its king as you treated Jericho and its king. The only booty you will take are the 
spoils and the cattle. Take up a concealed position by the town, to the rear of it”. 

Jos 8:3 Joshua set out to march against Ai with all the fighting men. Joshua chose thirty thousand of the bravest 
and sent them out under cover of dark, 

Jos 8:4 having given them these orders, “Pay attention! You must take up a concealed position by the town, at 
the rear, not very far from the town, and be sure you all keep alert! 

Jos 8:5 I, and the whole people with me, shall advance on the town, and when the people of Ai come out to 
engage us as they did the first time, we shall run away from them. 

Jos 8:6 They will then give chase, and we shall draw them away from the town, since they will think, ‘They are 
running away from us as they did the first time’. 

Jos 8:7 You will then burst out of your concealed position and seize the town; Yahweh your God will put it at 
your mercy. 

Jos 8:8 When you have captured the town, set fire to it, in obedience to Yahweh’s command. Well then, these 
are my orders”. 

Jos 8:9 Joshua sent them off, and they made their way to the place of ambush and took up position between 
Bethel and Ai, to the west of Ai. Joshua spent the night with the people, 

Jos 8:10 then, getting up early next morning, reviewed the people and, with the elders of Israel, marched on Ai 
at their head. 

Jos 8:1 1 All the warriors marching with him advanced on the front of the town and pitched camp north of Ai, with 



the valley between them and the town. 

Jos 8:12 Joshua took about five thousand men and concealed these between Bethel and Ai, to the west of the 
town. 

Jos 8:13 The people pitched the main camp to the north of the town and set up its ambush to the west of the 
town. Joshua went that night into the middle of the plain. 

Jos 8:14 The king of Ai had seen this; the people of the town got up early and hurried out, so that he and all his 
people could engage Israel in battle on the slope facing the Arabah; but he did not know that an ambush had 
been laid for him to the rear of the town. 

Jos 8:15 Joshua and all Israel pretended to be beaten by them and took to their heels along the road to the 
desert. 

Jos 8:16 All the people in the town joined in the pursuit and, in pursuing Joshua, were drawn away from the 
town. 

Jos 8:17 Not a man was left in Ai (nor in Bethel), who had not gone in pursuit of Israel; and in pursuing Israel 
they left the town undefended. 

Jos 8:18 Yahweh then said to Joshua, “Point the sabre in your hand at Ai; for I am about to put the town at your 
mercy”. Joshua pointed the sabre in his hand towards the town. 

Jos 8:19 No sooner had he stretched out his hand than the men in ambush burst from their position, ran 
forward, entered the town, captured it and quickly set it on fire. 

Jos 8:20 When the men of Ai looked back, they saw smoke rising from the town into the sky. None of them had 
the courage to run in any direction, for the people fleeing towards the desert turned back on their pursuers. 

Jos 8:21 For, once Joshua and all Israel saw that the town had been seized by the men in ambush, and that 
smoke was rising from the town, they turned about and attacked the men of Ai. 

Jos 8:22 The others came out from the town to engage them too, and the men of Ai were thus surrounded by 
Israelites, some on this side and some on that. The Israelites struck them down until not one was left alive and 
none to flee; 

Jos 8:23 but the king of Ai was taken alive, and brought to Joshua. 

Jos 8:24 When Israel had finished killing all the inhabitants of Ai in the open ground, and in the desert where 
they had pursued them, and when every single one had fallen to the sword, all Israel returned to Ai and 
slaughtered its remaining population. 

Jos 8:25 The number of those who fell that day, men and women together, was twelve thousand, all people of 
Ai. 

Jos 8:26 Joshua did not draw back the hand with which he had pointed the sabre until he had subjected all the 
inhabitants of Ai to the curse of destruction. 

Jos 8:27 For booty, Israel took only the cattle and the spoils of this town, in accordance with the order that 
Yahweh had given to Joshua. 

Jos 8:28 Joshua then burned Ai, making it a ruin for evermore, a desolate place even today. 

Jos 8:29 He hanged the king of Ai from a tree till evening; but at sunset Joshua ordered his body to be taken 
down from the tree. It was then thrown down at the entrance to the town gate and on top of it was raised a great 
mound of stones, which is still there today. 

Jos 8:30 Joshua then built an altar to Yahweh, God of Israel, on Mount Ebal, 

Jos 8:31 as Moses, servant of Yahweh, had ordered the Israelites, as is written in the law of Moses: an altar of 
undressed stones, on which no iron has been used. On this they presented burnt offerings to Yahweh and 
communion sacrifices as well. 

Jos 8:32 There, Joshua wrote on the stones a copy of the Law of Moses, which Moses had written in the 
presence of the Israelites. 

Jos 8:33 All Israel, with their elders, their officials and their judges, stood on either side of the ark, facing the 
levitical priests who were carrying the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, foreigners with the native-born, half of 
them on the upper slopes of Mount Gerizim, and half of them on the upper slopes of Mount Ebal, as Moses, 
servant of Yahweh, had originally ordered for the blessing of the people of Israel. 

Jos 8:34 After this, Joshua read all the words of the Law — the blessing and the cursing — exactly as it stands 
written in the Book of the Law. 

Jos 8:35 Of every word laid down by Moses, not one was left unread by Joshua in the presence of the whole 
assembly of Israel, including the women and children, and the foreigners living with them. 

Jos 9:1 Hearing these things, all the kings on this side of the Jordan, in the highlands and in the lowlands, all 
along the coast of the Great Sea towards the Lebanon, Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites and 
Jebusites, with one consent 

Jos 9:2 formed a fighting alliance against Joshua and Israel. 

Jos 9:3 When the inhabitants of Gibeon learned how Joshua had treated Jericho and Ai, for their part, 

Jos 9:4 they had recourse to a ruse. They provided themselves with supplies, and loaded their donkeys with old 



sacks and with old wineskins which had burst and been sewn up again. 

Jos 9:5 They put on patched old sandals and worn-out clothes. The only bread they took with them to eat was 
dried up and crumbling. 

Jos 9:6 They came to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal, and to him and the men of Israel they said, “We come from 
a distant country, so make a treaty with us”. 

Jos 9:7 The Israelites answered these Hivites, “For all we know, you may live right among us. How then could 
we make a treaty with you?”. 

Jos 9:8 They said to Joshua, “We are your servants”. “But who are you?”. Joshua asked them, “and where do you 
come from?”. 

Jos 9:9 They said, “Your servants have come from a country very far away, because of the fame of Yahweh 
your God; for we have heard of him and of all that he did in Egypt, 

Jos 9:10 and of all that he did to the two Amorite kings who used to live on the other side of the Jordan: Sihon 
king of Heshbon, and Og king of Bashan, who used to live at Ashtaroth. 

Jos 9:11 Because of which, our elders and all the people of our country said to us, ‘Take provisions with you for 
the journey; go and meet them and say to them: We are your servants; so make a treaty with us’. 

Jos 9:12 Here is our bread; it was warm when we took it from home to provide for our journey the day we set 
out to come to you, and now, you can see, it is dried up and crumbling. 

Jos 9:13 These wineskins were new when we filled them; you can see, they have burst; and these clothes and 
sandals of ours are worn out from travelling such a long way”. 

Jos 9:14 The leaders sampled some of the food they offered, but they did not ask Yahweh’s orders. 

Jos 9:15 Joshua made peace with them, and struck a treaty with them guaranteeing their lives, and the leaders 
of the community ratified it by oath. 

Jos 9:16 Now it so happened that three days after the treaty had been made, it became known that they were a 
neighbouring people, living in Israel’s region. 

Jos 9:17 The Israelites set out from camp, arriving in their towns three days later. Their towns were Gibeon, 
Chephirah, Beeroth and Kiriath-Jearim. 

Jos 9:18 The Israelites did not attack them, since the leaders of the community had sworn to them by Yahweh, 
God of Israel, but the whole community muttered against the leaders. 

Jos 9:19 The leaders, however, all said to the whole community, “Since we have sworn an oath to them by 
Yahweh, God of Israel, we cannot touch them now. 

Jos 9:20 This is what we shall do with them: let them live, rather than bring retribution down on ourselves on 
account of the oath which we have sworn to them”. 

Jos 9:21 And the leaders went on, “Let them live, but let them be wood-cutters and water-carriers for the whole 
community”. Thus spoke the leaders. 

Jos 9:22 Joshua sent for the Gibeonites and asked them, “Why did you deceive us by saying, ‘We live very far 
away’, when in fact you live right among us? 

Jos 9:23 From now on, you are accursed and will for ever be serfs, as wood-cutters and water-carriers in the 
house of my God”. 

Jos 9:24 Their answer to Joshua was, “We did it because your servants had been rightly told that Yahweh your 
God had ordered his servant Moses to give you the whole of this country and destroy all its inhabitants before 
you; also because, as you advanced on us, we feared very greatly for our lives. That was why we did this. 

Jos 9:25 Now, as you see, we are at your mercy; do to us whatever you think good and right”. 

Jos 9:26 What he did with them was this: he saved them from the hand of the Israelites, who did not kill them. 
Jos 9:27 But that very day Joshua made them wood-cutters and water-carriers for the community and for the 
altar of Yahweh, at the place which he would eventually choose; and so they are today. 

Jos 10:1 Now, it happened that Adoni-Zedek king of Jerusalem, learned that Joshua had conquered Ai and put 
the town under the curse of destruction, treating Ai and its king as he had already treated Jericho and its king; 
and also that the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were living with them. 

Jos 10:2 There was consternation at this, since Gibeon was as important a town as any of the royal towns 
themselves (it was larger than Ai), while all its citizens were fighting men. 

Jos 10:3 Consequently, Adoni-Zedek king of Jerusalem sent word to Hoham king of Hebron, Piram king of 
Jarmuth, Japhia king of Lachish, and Debir king of Eglon, 

Jos 10:4 “Join me up here and help me to conquer Gibeon, since it has made peace with Joshua and the 
Israelites”. 

Jos 1 0:5 The five Amorite kings joined forces and went up there, that is, the king of Jerusalem, the king of 
Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish and the king of Eglon, they and all their armies; laying siege to 
Gibeon, they attacked it. 

Jos 1 0:6 The men of Gibeon sent word to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal, “Do not desert your servants; come up 
here quickly to save us and help us, since all the Amorite kings living in the highlands have allied themselves 



against us”. 

Jos 10:7 Joshua came up from Gilgal, he, all the fighting men and all the bravest of his army. 

Jos 1 0:8 Yahweh said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid of these people; I have put them at your mercy; not one of 
them will put up any resistance”. 

Jos 10:9 Having marched from Gilgal throughout the night, Joshua caught them unawares. 

Jos 10:10 Yahweh threw them into disorder at the sight of Israel, defeating them completely at Gibeon; 
furthermore, he pursued them by way of the Descent of Beth-Horon and harassed them as far as Azekah (and 
as far as Makkedah). 

Jos 10:1 1 And as they fled from Israel down the Descent of Beth-Horon, Yahweh hurled huge hailstones from 
heaven on them all the way to Azekah, and they died. More of them died under the hailstones than under the 
swords of the Israelites. 

Jos 10:12 Joshua then spoke to Yahweh, the day Yahweh delivered the Amorites to the Israelites. In the 
presence of Israel, Joshua said: Sun, stand still over Gibeon, and, moon, you too, over the Vale of Aijalon! 

Jos 10:13 And the sun stood still, and the moon halted, until the people had taken vengeance on their enemies. 
Is this not written in the Book of the Just? The sun stood still in the middle of the sky and delayed its setting for 
almost a whole day. 

Jos 10:14 There was never a day like that before or since, when Yahweh obeyed the voice of a man - for 
Yahweh was fighting for Israel. 

Jos 10:15 Joshua, and all Israel with him, then went back to the camp at Gilgal. 

Jos 10:16 As regards the five kings, these had fled and hidden in the cave of Makkedah, 

Jos 10:17 and news of this was brought to Joshua. “The five kings have been found hiding in the cave at 
Makkedah”. 

Jos 10:18 Joshua said, “Roll great stones over the mouth of the cave and post men there to keep guard. 

Jos 10:19 You yourselves, do not stay there doing nothing; pursue the enemy, cut off their line of retreat and do 
not let them enter their towns, for Yahweh your God has put them at your mercy”. 

Jos 10:20 When Joshua and the Israelites had finished inflicting a very great defeat on them, to the point of 
destroying them, those who had escaped alive took refuge in their fortresses. 

Jos 10:21 The people came back to Joshua’s camp at Makkedah; they were all safe and sound, and no one 
dared to attempt anything against the Israelites. 

Jos 10:22 Joshua then said, “Clear the mouth of the cave and bring the five kings out to me”. 

Jos 1 0:23 They did so, and brought the five kings out of the cave to take them to him: the king of Jerusalem, the 
king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish and the king of Eglon. 

Jos 10:24 When these kings had been brought out, Joshua assembled all the men of Israel and said to the 
chiefs of the warriors who had fought with him, “Come forward and put your feet on the necks of these kings!”. 
They came forward and put their feet on their necks. 

Jos 10:25 “Be fearless and undaunted”, Joshua went on, “be strong and stand firm, for this is how Yahweh will 
deal with all the enemies you fight”. 

Jos 10:26 With this, Joshua struck and killed them and had them hanged on five trees; they hung there till 
evening. 

Jos 10:27 At the hour of sunset, on Joshua’s orders, they were taken down from the trees and thrown into the 
cave where they had been hiding. Great stones were laid over the mouth of the cave, and these are still there to 
this very day. 

Jos 10:28 The same day Joshua captured Makkedah, putting it and its king to the sword; he delivered them 
over to the curse of destruction, with every living creature there, and let no one escape, and he treated the king 
of Makkedah as he had treated the king of Jericho. 

Jos 10:29 Joshua, and all Israel with him, went on from Makkedah to Libnah and attacked it 

Jos 1 0:30 and Yahweh put this, too, and its king at Israel’s mercy; and Israel put every living creature there to 

the sword, and left none alive, and treated its king like the king of Jericho. 

Jos 10:31 Joshua, and all Israel with him, went on from Libnah to Lachish and besieged it and attacked it. 

Jos 10:32 Yahweh put Lachish at Israel’s mercy, and Israel took it on the second day and put it and every living 

creature in it to the sword, as they had treated Libnah. 

Jos 1 0:33 Horam king of Gezer then marched up to help Lachish, but Joshua beat him and his people until not 
one was left alive. 

Jos 10:34 Joshua, and all Israel with him, went on from Lachish to Eglon. They besieged it and attacked it. 

Jos 10:35 The same day they took it and put it to the sword. That day he delivered over to the curse of 
destruction every living creature there, treating it as he had treated Lachish. 

Jos 10:36 Joshua, and all Israel with him, went on up from Eglon to Hebron. They attacked it, 

Jos 10:37 took it and put it to the sword, with its king, its dependencies and every living creature in it. As he had 
treated Eglon, so here, he left no one alive. He delivered it over to the curse of destruction, with every living 



creature in it. 

Jos 10:38 Joshua, and all Israel with him, then turned back on Debir and attacked it. 

Jos 10:39 He took it and its king and all the places belonging to it; they put them to the sword, and every living 
creature there they delivered over to the curse of destruction. He left no one alive. As he had treated Hebron, as 
he had treated Libnah and its king, so he treated Debirand its king. 

Jos 10:40 Thus Joshua subjugated the whole country: the highlands, the Negeb, the lowlands and watered 
foothills, and all their kings. He left not one survivor and put every living thing under the curse of destruction, as 
Yahweh, God of Israel, had commanded. 

Jos 1 0:41 Joshua conquered them from Kadesh-Barnea to Gaza, and the whole region of Goshen as far as 
Gibeon. 

Jos 10:42 All these kings and their territory Joshua captured in a single campaign, because Yahweh, God of 
Israel, fought for Israel. 

Jos 10:43 And then Joshua, and all Israel with him, went back to the camp at Gilgal. 

Jos 1 1:1 When Jabin king of Hazor heard about this, he sent word to Jobab king of Merom, to the king of 
Shimron, to the king of Achshaph 

Jos 1 1 :2 and to the kings in the northern highlands, in the plain south of Chinneroth, and those in the lowlands 
and on the slopes of Dor to the west. 

Jos 11:3 To eastward and to westward lived the Canaanites: in the highlands, the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites 
and Jebusites; the Hivites, at the foot of Hermon in the area of Mizpah. 

Jos 1 1 :4 They set out with all their troops, a people as numerous as the sands of the sea, with a huge number 
of horses and chariots. 

Jos 1 1 :5 These kings, having all agreed on a meeting place, came and set up camp together at the Waters of 
Merom, to fight Israel. 

Jos 1 1 :6 Yahweh then said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid of them, for by this time tomorrow I shall hand them all 
over, cut to pieces, to Israel; you will hamstring their horses and burn their chariots”. 

Jos 1 1 :7 With all his warriors Joshua caught them unawares near the Waters of Merom and fell on them. 

Jos 1 1 :8 Yahweh put them at Israel’s mercy and they defeated them and pursued them as far as Sidon the 
Great, and as far as Misrephoth to the west, and as far as the Vale of Mizpah to the east; they harried them until 
not one of them was left alive. 

Jos 1 1 :9 Joshua treated them as Yahweh had told him; he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots. 
Jos 11:10 Joshua then turned back and captured Hazor, putting its king to the sword. Hazor in olden days was 
the capital of all these kingdoms. 

Jos 11:11 In compliance with the curse of destruction, they put every living creature there to the sword. Not a 
living soul was left, and Hazor was burnt to the ground. 

Jos 11:12 All these royal cities and all their kings Joshua put to the sword in compliance with the curse of 
destruction, as Moses, servant of Yahweh, had ordered. 

Jos 11:13 Yet of all these towns standing on their mounds, Israel burned none, apart from Hazor, burnt by 
Joshua. 

Jos 11:14 All the spoils of these towns, including the livestock, the Israelites took as booty for themselves. But 
they put all the human beings to the sword till they had destroyed them completely; they did not leave a living 
soul. 

Jos 11:15 What Yahweh had ordered his servant Moses, Moses in turn had ordered Joshua, and Joshua 
carried it out, leaving nothing undone of what Yahweh had ordered Moses. 

Jos 11:16 In consequence, Joshua captured this entire country: the highlands, the whole Negeb and the whole 
of Goshen, the lowlands, the Arabah, the highlands and lowlands of Israel. 

Jos 11:17 From Mount Halak, which rises towards Seir, to Baal-Gad in the Vale of Lebanon at the foot of Mount 
Hermon, he captured all their kings, struck them down and put them to death. 

Jos 11:18 For many a day Joshua made war on all these kings; 

Jos 11:19 no city had made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites who lived at Gibeon; all the rest had 
been captured in battle. 

Jos 1 1 :20 For Yahweh had decided to harden the hearts of these men, so that they would engage Israel in 
battle and thus come under the curse of destruction and so receive no quarter but be exterminated, as Yahweh 
had ordered Moses. 

Jos 1 1 :21 Joshua then went and wiped out the Anakim of the highlands, of Hebron, of Debir, of Anab, of all the 
highlands of Judah and of all the highlands of Israel; he delivered them and their towns over to the curse of 
destruction. 

Jos 1 1 :22 No Anakim were left in the territory of the Israelites, except at Gaza, Gath and Ashdod. 

Jos 1 1 :23 Joshua captured the entire country, just as Yahweh had told Moses, and he gave it as heritage to 
Israel, to be shared out between their tribes. And the country had rest from warfare. 



Jos 12:1 The kings of the country, whom the Israelites conquered and whose territory they took, on the further, 
eastern side of the Jordan, from the Wadi Arnon to Mount Hermon, with the entire Arabah to the east, were as 
follows: 

Jos 12:2 Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon, ruled from Aroer which is on the edge of the Arnon 
Valley, including the bottom of the valley, half Gilead and as far as the Jabbok, the river forming the frontier with 
the Ammonites; 

Jos 12:3 the eastern Arabah up to the Sea of Chinneroth, and as far as the Sea of the Arabah, or Salt Sea, on 
the eastern side, in the direction of Beth-Jeshimoth, and, in the south, the watered foothills of Mount Pisgah. 

Jos 12:4 Og king of Bashan, one of the last of the Rephaim, who lived at Ashtaroth and Edrei, 

Jos 12:5 ruled over Mount Hermon and Salecah, the whole of Bashan to the frontier of the Geshurites and 
Maacathites, and half Gilead to the frontier of Sihon king of Heshbon. 

Jos 12:6 Moses, servant of Yahweh, and the Israelites conquered these, and Moses, servant of Yahweh, 
conferred their territory on the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh. 

Jos 12:7 The kings of the country whom Joshua and the Israelites conquered on the nearer, western side of the 
Jordan, from Baal-Gad in the Vale of Lebanon to Mount Halak rising towards Seir, and whose heritage Joshua 
distributed to the tribes of Israel, dividing it up between them, were as follows: 

Jos 12:8 In the highlands and the lowlands, in the Arabah and in the watered foothills, in the desert and in the 
Negeb, belonging to the Hittites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites and the Jebusites: 

Jos 12:9 the king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai near Bethel, one; 

Jos 12:10 the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 

Jos 12:11 the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; 

Jos 12:12 the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; 

Jos 12:13 the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one; 

Jos 12:14 the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one; 

Jos 12:15 the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one; 

Jos 12:16 the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; 

Jos 12:17 the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; 

Jos 12:18 the king of Aphek, one; the king of Sharon, one; 

Jos 12:19 the king of Merom, one; the king of Hazor, one; 

Jos 12:20 the king of Shimron Meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one; 

Jos 12:21 the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one; 

Jos 12:22 the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one; 

Jos 1 2:23 the king of Dor, on the Slopes of Dor, one; the king of the nations in Galilee, one; 

Jos 12:24 the king of Tirzah, one; Total number of all these kings: thirty-one. 

Jos 13:1 Now Joshua had grown old and advanced in years. Yahweh said to him, “You are now old and 
advanced in years, yet there is still a great deal of territory left to be taken possession of. 

Jos 13:2 This is all the territory left: “All the districts of the Philistines and the whole country of the Geshurites; 
Jos 13:3 from the Shihor, facing Egypt, to the frontier of Ekron in the north, is reckoned as Canaanite territory. 
The five rulers of the Philistines have their seats at Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath and Ekron, respectively; the 
Avvites are in 

Jos 1 3:4 the south. The entire territory of the Canaanites, and Mearah which belongs to the Sidonians, as far as 
Aphekah and as far as the frontier of the Amorites; 

Jos 13:5 and then the country of the Gebalites with the entire Lebanon eastwards from Baal-Gad at the foot of 
Mount Hermon to the Pass of Hamath. 

Jos 13:6 “All who live in the highlands from the Lebanon to Misrephoth in the west — all the Sidonians — 1 myself 
shall dispossess before the Israelites. All you have to do is to distribute the territory as a heritage for the 
Israelites as I have ordered you. 

Jos 13:7 The time has come to divide this territory as a heritage between the nine tribes and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh: from the Jordan as far as the Great Sea in the west, you must give it them; the Great Sea will be 
their limit”. 

Jos 13:8 As regards the other half-tribe of Manasseh, this and the Reubenites and Gadites had already received 
their heritage, given them by Moses on the further, eastern side of the Jordan, the one which Moses, servant of 
Yahweh, had already given them: 

Jos 1 3:9 The country onwards from Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Valley, with the town in the bottom of the 
valley and the entire tableland from Medeba to Dibon; 

Jos 13:10 all the towns of Sihon king of the Amorites, who had reigned in Heshbon, to the frontier of the 
Ammonites; 

Jos 13:11 then Gilead and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites with the whole Hermon range and the 
whole of Bashan as far as Salecah; 



Jos 13:12 and in Bashan, the whole kingdom of Og, who had reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei, and was the last 
of the survivors of the Rephaim. Moses had conquered and dispossessed these two kings. 

Jos 13:13 The Israelites did not, however, dispossess either the Geshurites or the Maacathites, hence Geshur 
and Maacah survive inside Israel even today. 

Jos 13:14 To the tribe of Levi alone no heritage was given; Yahweh, God of Israel, was his heritage, as he had 
told him. 

Jos 13:15 Moses had given the tribe of the sons of Reuben a share by clans. 

Jos 13:16 Thus, their territory was the entire tableland from Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Valley, with the town 
in the bottom of the valley, as far as Medeba, 

Jos 13:17 Heshbon with all the towns on the tableland: Dibon, Bamoth-Baal, Beth-Baal-Meon, 

Jos 13:18 Jahaz, Kedemoth, Mephaath, 

Jos 13:19 Kiriathaim, Sibmah and, in the highlands of the Arabah, Zereth-Shahar; 

Jos 13:20 Beth-Peor, the watered foothills of Mount Pisgah, Beth-ha-Jeshimoth, 

Jos 13:21 all the towns on the tableland and the entire kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, who had reigned 
in Heshbon; he had been defeated by Moses, and with him the princes of Midian, Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur and 
Reba, vassals of Sihon, formerly living in the country. 

Jos 13:22 As regards Balaam son of Beor, the soothsayer, the Israelites had put him to the sword with those 
whom they had killed. 

Jos 13:23 The boundary of the Reubenites was the Jordan and its territory. Such was the heritage of the sons of 
Reuben, by clans, with the towns and villages belonging to them. 

Jos 1 3:24 Moses had given the tribe of Gad, the sons of Gad, a share by clans. 

Jos 1 3:25 Their territory was Jazer, all the towns of Gilead, half the country of the Ammonites as far as Aroer 
facing Rabbah, 

Jos 13:26 and from Heshbon to Ramath-Mizpeh and Betonim; from Mahanaim as far as the territory of Lo- 
Debar, 

Jos 13:27 and in the valley: Beth-Haram, Beth-Nimrah, Succoth, and Zaphon — the rest of the kingdom of Sihon 
king of Heshbon — the Jordan and the territory running to the tip of the Sea of Chinneroth, on the further, eastern 
side of the Jordan. 

Jos 13:28 Such was the heritage of the sons of Gad, by clans, with their towns and villages belonging to them. 
Jos 13:29 Moses had given the half-tribe of Manasseh a share by clans. 

Jos 1 3:30 Their territory, starting from Mahanaim, was the whole of Bashan, the entire kingdom of Og king of 
Bashan, all the Encampments of Jair in Bashan: sixty towns. 

Jos 1 3:31 Half of Gilead, with Ashtaroth, and Edrei, the royal cities of Og in Bashan, were allotted to the sons of 
Machir son of Manasseh, to half of the sons of Machir, by clans. 

Jos 13:32 This was what Moses had conferred in heritage on the Plains of Moab on the further, eastern side of 
the Jordan opposite Jericho. 

Jos 13:33 To the tribe of Levi, however, Moses gave no heritage; Yahweh, God of Israel, was his heritage, as 
he had told him. 

Jos 14:1 This was what the Israelites received as their heritage in Canaan, which was given them as their 
heritage by the priest, Eleazar, and by Joshua son of Nun, with the heads of families of the tribes of Israel. 

Jos 14:2 They received their heritage by lot, as Yahweh had ordered through Moses, as regards the nine tribes 
and the half-tribe. 

Jos 14:3 For Moses himself had given the two-and-a-half tribes their heritage on the further side of the Jordan, 
although to the Levites he had given no heritage with them. 

Jos 14:4 Since the sons of Joseph formed two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim, no share in the country was 
given to the Levites, apart from some towns to live in, with their pasture lands for their livestock and their 
possessions. 

Jos 14:5 The Israelites did as Yahweh had ordered Moses, and shared out the country. 

Jos 14:6 Some sons of Judah came to Joshua at Gilgal, and Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, 
“You know what Yahweh said to Moses, man of God, at Kadesh-Barnea concerning you and me. 

Jos 14:7 I was forty years old when Moses, servant of Yahweh, sent me from Kadesh-Barnea to reconnoitre this 
country, and I made him a completely honest report. 

Jos 14:8 The brothers, however, who had gone up with me discouraged the people, whereäs I myself 
scrupulously obeyed Yahweh my God. 

Jos 14:9 That day Moses swore this oath, ‘Be sure of this, that the country your foot has trodden will be a 
heritage for you and your children for ever, since you have scrupulously obeyed Yahweh my God’. 

Jos 14:10 From then till now, Yahweh has kept me alive in observance of his promise. It is forty-five years since 
Yahweh said this to Moses — Israel was then going through the desert — and now I am eighty-five years old. 

Jos 14:1 1 Today I am still as strong as the day when Moses sent me out on that errand; for fighting, for going 



and coming, I am as strong now as then. 

Jos 14:12 It is time you gave me the highlands, of which Yahweh spoke to me that day. You heard that day that 
there were Anakim and large, fortified towns there; but if Yahweh is with me, I shall drive them out, as Yahweh 
has said”. 

Jos 14:13 Joshua blessed Caleb son of Jephunneh and gave him Hebron as heritage. 

Jos 14:14 And hence Hebron down to the present day has remained the heritage of Caleb son of Jephunneh 
the Kenizzite, since he had scrupulously obeyed Yahweh, God of Israel. 

Jos 14:15 Hebron in olden days was called Kiriath-Arba. Arba had been the greatest of the Anakim. And the 
country had rest from warfare. 

Jos 15:1 The portion falling to the tribe of the sons of Judah, by clans, was near the frontier of Edom, from the 
desert of Zin southwards to Kadesh in the south. 

Jos 15:2 Their southern frontier began at the tip of the Salt Sea, at the southerly bay; 

Jos 15:3 it proceeded south of the Ascent of Scorpions, crossed Zin and came up to Kadesh-Barnea from the 
south; past Hezron, it went on to Addar and turned towards Karka; 

Jos 15:4 the frontier then went on to Azmon, came out at the Torrent of Egypt and reached as far as the sea. 
This is to be your southern frontier. 

Jos 1 5:5 The eastern frontier was the Salt Sea as far as the mouth of the Jordan. 

Jos 15:6 The northern boundary began at the bay at the mouth of the Jordan. The boundary went up to Beth- 
Hoglah, passed north of Beth-ha-Arabah and went on to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben. 

Jos 1 5:7 The boundary then went on to Debir from the Vale of Achor and turned north towards the stone circle 
opposite the Ascent of Adummim, which is south of the Torrent; the boundary went on to the Waters of En- 
Shemesh and came out at En-Rogel. 

Jos 1 5:8 It then went back up the Valley of Hinnom, coming from the south to the flank of the Jebusite — that is, 
Jerusalem — and climbed to the crest of the mountain barring the Valley of Hinnom to the west, at the northern 
end of the Valley of the Rephaim. 

Jos 15:9 From the mountain top, the boundary curved round to the spring of the Waters of Nephtoah, went on to 
the towns of Mount Ephron and then turned towards Baalah — that is, Kiriath-Jearim. 

Jos 15:10 From Baalah, the boundary curved westwards to the highlands of Seir, skirted the northern slope of 
Mount Jearim — that is, Chesalon — went down to Beth-Shemesh and through Timnah, 

Jos 15:1 1 came out on the northern flank of Ekron, turned towards Shikkeron and, passing through the 
highlands of Baalah, came out at Jabneel, and reached as far as the sea. 

Jos 15:12 The western boundary was the Great Sea itself. Such was the frontier surrounding the sons of Judah, 
by clans. 

Jos 15:13 Caleb son of Jephunneh was given a share within that of the sons of Judah, in accordance with 
Yahweh’s order to Joshua: Kiriath-Arba, the town of the father of Anak — that is, Hebron. 

Jos 15:14 Caleb drove out the three sons of Anak: Sheshai, Ahiman and Talmai, descended from Anak. 

Jos 15:15 From there he marched on the inhabitants of Debir; Debir in olden days was called Kiriath-Sepher. 

Jos 15:16 Caleb then said, “To the man who attacks and takes Kiriath-Sepher, I shall give my daughter Achsah 
as wife”. 

Jos 15:17 The man who captured it was Othniel son of Kenaz, brother of Caleb, who gave him his daughter 
Achsah as wife. 

Jos 15:18 When she arrived, he urged her to ask her father for arable land, but when she alighted from the 
donkey and Caleb asked her, “What is the matter?”. 

Jos 15:19 she said to him, “Grant me a blessing! As the land you have given me is the Negeb, give me springs 
of water too!”. So Caleb gave her what she wanted, the upper springs and the lower springs. 

Jos 1 5:20 Such was the heritage of the tribe of the sons of Judah, by clans. 

Jos 15:21 Towns at the extremity of the tribe of the sons of Judah, near the frontier of Edom in the Negeb: 
Kabzeel, Arad, Jagur, 

Jos 15:22 Kinah, Dimon, Aroer, 

Jos 15:23 Kedesh, Hazor-lthnan, 

Jos 15:24 Ziph, Telem, Bealoth, 

Jos 15:25 Hazor-Hadattah, Kiriath-Hezron — that is, Hazor- 
Jos 15:26 Amam, Shema, Moladah, 

Jos 15:27 Hazar-Gaddah, Heshmon, Beth-Pelet, 

Jos 15:28 Hazar-Shual, Beersheba and its dependencies, 

Jos 15:29 Baalah, lim, Ezem, 

Jos 15:30 Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah, 

Jos 15:31 Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah, 

Jos 1 5:32 Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain and Rimmon: in all, twenty-nine towns with their villages. 



Jos 15:33 In the lowlands: Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah, 

Jos 15:34 Zanoah, En-Gannim, Tappuah, Enam, 

Jos 15:35 Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah, 

Jos 15:36 Shaaraim, Aditaim, Ha-Gederah and Gederothaim: fourteen towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:37 Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal-Gad, 

Jos 15:38 Dilean, Ha-Mizpeh, Jokteel, 

Jos 15:39 Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon, 

Jos 15:40 Cabbon, Lahmas, Chitlish, 

Jos 15:41 Gederoth, Beth-Dagon, Naamah and Makkedah: sixteen towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:42 Libna, Ether, Asham, 

Jos 15:43 Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib, 

Jos 15:44 Keilah, Achzib and Mareshah: nine towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:45 Ekron with its dependencies and its villages. 

Jos 15:46 From Ekron to the sea, everything to the side of Ashdod, with its villages. 

Jos 15:47 Ashdod with its dependencies and its villages; Gaza with its dependencies and its villages as far as 
the Torrent of Egypt, the Great Sea forming the boundary. 

Jos 15:48 In the highlands: Shamir, Jattir, Socoh, 

Jos 15:49 Dannah, Kiriath-Sepher, now Debir, 

Jos 15:50 Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim, 

Jos 15:51 Goshen, Holon and Giloh: eleven towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:52 Arab, Dumah, Eshan, 

Jos 15:53 Janum, Beth-Tappuah, Aphekah, 

Jos 15:54 Humtah, Kiriath-Arba, now Hebron, and Zior: nine towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:55 Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah, 

Jos 15:56 Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah, 

Jos 15:57 Ha-Kain, Gibeah and Timnah: ten towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:58 Halhul, Beth-Zur, Gedor, 

Jos 15:59 Maarath, Beth-Anoth and Eltekon: six towns with their villages. Tekoa, Ephrathah, now Bethlehem, 
Peor, Etam, Kulon, Tatam, Sores, Carem, Gallim, Betherand Manach: eleven towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:60 Kiriath-Baal, that is Kiriath-Jearim, and Rabbah: two towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:61 In the desert: Beth-Arabah, Middin, Secacah, 

Jos 15:62 Nibshan, Salt Town and En-Gedi: six towns with their villages. 

Jos 15:63 The Jebusites, however, who lived in Jerusalem, the sons of Judah were unable to dispossess, and 
the Jebusites still live in Jerusalem today, side by side with the sons of Judah. 

Jos 16:1 The portion of the sons of Joseph started on the east at the Jordan opposite Jericho (the Waters of 
Jericho) through the desert rising from Jericho into the highlands of Bethel; 

Jos 16:2 from Bethel it went to Luz, and on towards the frontier of the Archites at Ataroth; 

Jos 16:3 then passed downwards and westwards to the frontier of the Japhletites as far as the border of Lower 
Beth-Horon and on to Gezer, and reached as far as the sea. 

Jos 16:4 Such was the heritage of the sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim. 

Jos 16:5 As regards the territory of the sons of Ephraim, by clans, the frontier of their heritage ran from Ataroth- 
Arach to Upper Beth-Horon; 

Jos 16:6 the frontier then reached as far as the sea ... the Michmethath in the north, and the frontier turned 
east to Tanaath-Shiloh which it crossed in an easterly direction to Janoah; 

Jos 16:7 it ran down to Ataroth and Naarah, touched Jericho and ended at the Jordan. 

Jos 16:8 From Tappuah, the frontier ran westwards to the Torrent of Kanah and reached as far as the sea. Such 
was the heritage of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim, by clans, 

Jos 16:9 apart from the towns reserved for the sons of Ephraim inside the heritage of the sons of Manasseh, all 
these towns and their villages. 

Jos 16:10 The Canaanites living in Gezer were not driven out; they have remained in Ephraim to the present 
day but are obliged to do forced labour. 

Jos 17:1 The portion of the tribe of Manasseh, who was in fact Joseph’s first-born — went to Machir, Manasseh’s 
first-born, father of Gilead, for he was a warrior; he had Gilead and Bashan. 

Jos 17:2 The other sons of Manasseh had theirs, by clans: for the sons of Abiezer, for the sons of Helek, for the 
sons of Asriel, for the sons of Shechem, for the sons of Hepher, and for the sons of Shemida: these were the 
male children of Manasseh son of Joseph, by clans. 

Jos 17:3 Zelophehad son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, had no sons but only 
daughters, whose names were these: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah and Tirzah. 

Jos 17:4 These approached the priest Eleazar, Joshua son of Nun and the leaders, and said, “Yahweh ordered 



Moses to give us a heritage among our brothers”. In compliance with Yahweh’s order, therefore, they were given 
a heritage among their father’s brothers. 

Jos 17:5 In this way ten portions fell to Manasseh, apart from Gilead and Bashan lying on the further side of the 
Jordan, 

Jos 17:6 since Manasseh’s daughters received a heritage as well as his sons. Gilead itself belonged to 
Manasseh’s other sons. 

Jos 17:7 On the side of Asher, the frontier of Manasseh was the Michmethath, which is opposite Shechem, and 
thence continued to the right to Jashib, which is at the spring of Tappuah. 

Jos 17:8 The territory of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, but Tappuah on Manasseh’s border belonged to the 
sons of Ephraim. 

Jos 17:9 The boundary went down to the Torrent of Kanah; south of the Torrent were the towns of Ephraim, 
excluding those owned by Ephraim among the towns of Manasseh; the boundary of Manasseh was north of the 
Torrent and reached as far as the sea. 

Jos 17:10 The south belonged to Ephraim and the north to Manasseh and reached as far as the sea; they 
touched Asher to the north and Issachar to the east. 

Jos 17:1 1 With Issachar and Asher, Manasseh shared Beth-Shean and its dependent towns, Ibleam and its 
dependent towns, the inhabitants of Dor and of its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Taanach and Megiddo 
and of their dependent towns: the Three of the Slopes. 

Jos 17:12 But because the sons of Manasseh could not take possession of these towns, the Canaanites 
managed to live on in that territory. 

Jos 17:13 When, however, the Israelites became stronger, they subjected the Canaanites to forced labour, 
though they never dispossessed them. 

Jos 17:14 The sons of Joseph spoke as follows to Joshua, “Why have you given me only one share, only one 
portion, as heritage, when I am a numerous people, since Yahweh has so blessed me?”. 

Jos 17:15 Joshua replied, “If your people are so many, go up to the wooded area and clear space for yourselves 
in the area belonging to the Perizzites and Rephaim, since the highlands of Ephraim are too small for you”. 

Jos 17:16 The sons of Joseph replied, “The highlands are not enough for us, and what is more, all the 
Canaanites living on the land of the plain have iron chariots, so do those in Beth-Shean and its dependent 
towns, and those in the plain of Jezreel”. 

Jos 17:17 Joshua said to the House of Joseph, to Ephraim and to Manasseh, “You are a numerous people and 
your strength is great; you will not only have one share, 

Jos 17:18 but a mountain will be yours as well; even if it is a forest, you can clear it and its territories will be 
yours. And you will dispossess the Canaanites, although they have iron chariots and although they are strong”. 
Jos 18:1 The whole community of the Israelites assembled at Shiloh, and the Tent of Meeting was set up there; 
the whole country had been subdued for them. 

Jos 18:2 But among the Israelites there were still seven tribes left who had not received their heritage. 

Jos 18:3 Joshua then said to the Israelites, “How much more time are you going to waste before you go and 
take possession of the country which Yahweh, God of your ancestors, has given to you? 

Jos 18:4 Choose three men from each tribe for me to send all over the country so that they can make a survey 
with a view to their inheritances and then come back to me. 

Jos 18:5 They will divide the country into seven portions. Judah will remain in his territory in the south, and 
those of the House of Joseph will remain in their territory in the north. 

Jos 18:6 You must survey the country in seven sections and bring your findings to me here, so that I can cast 
lots for you here, in the presence of Yahweh our God. 

Jos 18:7 The Levites, however, will have no portion with the rest of you; the priesthood of Yahweh will be their 
heritage. As regards Gad and Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh, they have received their heritage on the 
further, eastern side of the Jordan, the one given them by Moses, servant of Yahweh”. 

Jos 18:8 The men stood up and set off. To those who were to survey the country Joshua gave this order, “Start 
out, then, go all over the country, survey it, and then come back to me; and I shall cast lots for you here, in the 
presence of Yahweh, at Shiloh”. 

Jos 18:9 The men left, went all over the country and surveyed it by towns, in seven sections, writing down their 
findings in a book, and then went back to Joshua in the camp at Shiloh. 

Jos 18:10 Joshua cast lots for them in Yahweh’s presence at Shiloh, and there Joshua divided the country 
between the Israelites, share by share. 

Jos 18:1 1 A portion fell first to the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, by clans: the territory of their portion lay 
between the sons of Judah and the sons of Joseph. 

Jos 18:12 Their northern frontier began at the Jordan, went up the flank of Jericho to the north, climbed 
westwards through the highlands and came out at the desert of Beth-Aven. 

Jos 18:13 Thence, the frontier went on to Luz, on the southern flank of Luz — now Bethel-and then down to 



Ataroth-Arach, on the mountain south of Lower Beth-Horon. 

Jos 18:14 At this westerly point, the frontier curved round and turned south, from the mountain facing Beth- 
Horon from the south and came out at Kiriath-Baal, now Kiriath-Jearim, a town of the sons of Judah. That was 
the western side. 

Jos 18:15 This was the south side: from the tip of Kiriath-Jearim, the frontier went to Gasin and came out near 
the spring of the Waters of Nephtoah, 

Jos 18:16 it then went down to the edge of the mountain facing the Valley of Hinnom, in the Valley of the 
Rephaim to the north; it then went down into the Valley of Hinnom, past the southerly flank of the Jebusite, and 
went down to En-Rogel. 

Jos 18:17 It then curved northwards, coming out at En-Shemesh, and came out at the stone circle opposite the 
Ascent of Adummim, then went down to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben. 

Jos 18:18 It then went on to Cheteph on the flank of Beth-ha-Arabah northwards, and went down into the 
Arabah; 

Jos 18:19 the frontier then passed round the northern flank of Beth-Hoglah, and the frontier came out at the 
northern bay of the Salt Sea, at the southern end of the Jordan. Such was the southern frontier. 

Jos 18:20 The Jordan itself formed the frontier on the east. Such was the heritage of the sons of Benjamin as 
defined by their frontier, by clans. 

Jos 1 8:21 The towns of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, by clans, were: 

Jos 18:22 Jericho, Beth-Hoglah, Emek-Keziz; 

Jos 18:23 Beth-Arabah, Zemaraim, Bethel; Avvim, Parah, Ophrah; 

Jos 18:24 Chephar-Ammoni, Ophni, Geba: twelve towns and their villages. 

Jos 18:25 Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth; 

Jos 18:26 Mizpeh, Chephirah, Mozah; 

Jos 18:27 Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah; 

Jos 18:28 Zela-ha-Eleph, the Jebusite — that is, Jerusalem — Gibeah and Kiriath: fourteen towns with their 
villages. Such was the heritage of the sons of Benjamin, by clans. 

Jos 19:1 The second lot to come out was for Simeon, for the tribe of the sons of Simeon, by clans; their heritage 
was within the heritage of the sons of Judah. 

Jos 19:2 As heritage, they received: 

Jos 19:3 Beersheba, Shema, Moladah, 

Jos 19:4 Hazar-Shual, Balah, Ezem, Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah, 

Jos 19:5 Ziklag, Beth-ha-Marcaboth, Hazar-Susa, 

Jos 19:6 Beth-Lebaoth and Sharuhen: thirteen towns and their villages. 

Jos 19:7 Ain, Rimmon, Ether and Ashan: four towns and their villages, 

Jos 1 9:8 with all the villages situated near these towns as far as Baalath-Beer and Ramah of the Negeb. Such 
was the heritage of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, by clans. 

Jos 1 9:9 The heritage of the sons of Simeon was taken out of the portion of the sons of Judah, because the 
share of the sons of Judah was too large for them; hence, the sons of Simeon received their heritage within the 
heritage of the sons of Judah. 

Jos 19:10 The third lot fell to the sons of Zebulun, by clans; the territory of their heritage stretched as far as 
Sadud; 

Jos 19:1 1 their frontier climbed westwards to Maraalah, touching Dabbesheth and the torrent facing Jokneam. 
Jos 19:12 From Sadud, the frontier turned east, towards the rising sun, as far as the frontier of Chisloth-Tabor; it 
came out at Dobrath and went up to Japhia. 

Jos 19:13 Thence, it went east, towards the sunrise, to Gath-Hepher and Ittah-Kazin, came out at Rimmon and 
turned towards Neah. 

Jos 19:14 The northern frontier turned towards Hannathon and came to an end in the Valley of Iphtah-EI; 

Jos 19:15 with Kattath, Nahalal, Shimron, Iralah and Bethlehem: twelve towns with their villages. 

Jos 19:16 Such was the heritage of the sons of Zebulun, by clans: these towns with their villages. 

Jos 19:17 The fourth lot came out for Issachar, for the sons of Issachar, by clans. 

Jos 19:18 Their territory stretched towards Jezreel and included Chesulloth, Shunem, 

Jos 19:19 Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath, 

Jos 19:20 Dobrath, Kishion, Ebez, 

Jos 19:21 Remeth, En-Gannim, En-Haddah and Beth-Pazzez. 

Jos 1 9:22 Their frontier touched Tabor, Shahazimah and Beth-Shemesh, and the frontier came to an end at the 
Jordan: sixteen towns with their villages. 

Jos 1 9:23 Such was the heritage of the tribe of the sons of Issachar, by clans: the towns and their villages. 

Jos 1 9:24 The fifth lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Asher, by clans. 

Jos 19:25 Their territory included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achshaph, 



Jos 19:26 Alammelech, Amad and Mishal. 

Jos 19:27 On the west, it touched Carmel and the course of the Libnath. On the side of the rising sun, it went as 
far as Beth-Dagon, touched Zebulun, the Valley of Iphtah-EI on the north side, Beth-ha-Emek and Neiel, coming 
out with Cabul on the left, 

Jos 1 9:28 with Abdon, Rehob, Hammon and Kanah as far as Sidon the Great. The frontier then turned towards 
Ramah, as far as the fortress-town of Tyre; 

Jos 19:29 the frontier then went to Hosah and reached as far as the sea at Mahalab and Achzib, 

Jos 19:30 with Acco, Aphek and Rehob: twenty-two towns with their villages. 

Jos 1 9:31 Such was the heritage of the tribe of the sons of Asher, by clans; these towns and their villages. 

Jos 19:32 To the sons of Naphtali fell the sixth portion, to the sons of Naphtali, by clans. 

Jos 1 9:33 Their frontier went from Heleph and the Oak of Zanaannim, with Adami-ha-Negeb and Jabneel, as far 
as Lakkum, and ended at the Jordan. 

Jos 19:34 The westward boundary ran to Aznoth-Tabor and thence came out at Hukkok, marching with Zebulun 
in the south, Asher in the west and the Jordan in the east. 

Jos 19:35 The fortified towns were Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Chinnereth, 

Jos 19:36 Adamah, Ramah, Hazor, 

Jos 19:37 Kedesh, Edrei, En-Hazor, 

Jos 19:38 Jiron, Migdal-EI, Horem, Beth-Anath and Beth-Shemesh: nineteen towns and their villages. 

Jos 1 9:39 Such was the heritage of the sons of Naphtali, by clans: the towns and their villages. 

Jos 19:40 To the tribe of the sons of Dan, by clans, fell the seventh portion. 

Jos 19:41 The territory of their heritage comprised: Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir-Shemesh, 

Jos 19:42 Shaalbim, Aijalon, Silatha, 

Jos 19:43 Elon, Timnah, Ekron, 

Jos 19:44 Eltekeh, Gibbethon, 

Jos 19:45 Baalath, Azor, Bene-Berak and Gath-Rimmon; 

Jos 19:46 and, by the sea, Jerakon with the territory facing Jaffa. 

Jos 19:47 The territory of the sons of Dan eluded them, however, and the sons of Dan consequently went up 
and attacked Leshem, captured it and put it to the sword. Having gained possession of it, they settled there and 
called Leshem, Dan, after Dan their ancestor. 

Jos 1 9:48 Such was the heritage of the tribe of the sons of Dan, by clans: these towns and their villages. 

Jos 19:49 Having finished dividing the country, frontier by frontier, the Israelites gave Joshua son of Nun a 
heritage among themselves; 

Jos 19:50 at Yahweh’s command, they gave him the town which he had asked for, Timnath-Serah in the 
highlands of Ephraim; he rebuilt the town and settled there. 

Jos 1 9:51 Such are the heritages which the priest Eleazar, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of each family 
apportioned by lot between the tribes of Israel at Shiloh, in Yahweh’s presence, at the door of the Tent of 
Meeting; and thus the apportioning of the country was completed. 

Jos 20:1 Yahweh said to Joshua, 

Jos 20:2 “Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘Choose yourselves the cities of refuge of which I spoke to 
you through Moses, 

Jos 20:3 to which anyone who has accidentally (unintentionally) killed someöne else may flee, and which will 
serve you as refuge from the avenger of blood. 

Jos 20:4 (The killer must flee to one of these towns. He will stop at the entrance to the town gate and explain his 
case to the town elders. These will admit him to their town and assign him a place to live among them. 

Jos 20:5 If the avenger of blood pursues him, they must not hand the killer over to him, since he has killed his 
fellow unintentionally and was not motivated by long-standing hatred for him. 

Jos 20:6 He must stay in this town) until he is brought to trial before the community (until the death of the high 
priest then in office. Only then may the killer go back to his own town and to his own house in the town from 
which he has fled)’. 

Jos 20:7 For this purpose they designated Kedesh in Galilee, in the highlands of Naphtali, Shechem in the 
highlands of Ephraim, and Kiriath-Arba — now Hebron — in the highlands of Judah. 

Jos 20:8 On the other, eastern, side of the Jordan opposite Jericho, in the desert of the tableland, they chose 
Bezer of the tribe of Reuben, Ramoth in Gilead of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan of the tribe of 
Manasseh. 

Jos 20:9 Such were the towns designated for all the Israelites and for foreigners living among them, so that 
anyone who had accidentally killed someöne could flee there and might escape the hand of the avenger of 
blood, until brought to trial before the community. 

Jos 21:1 The heads of families of the Levites then came to the priest, Eleazar, Joshua son of Nun and the 
heads of families of the tribes of Israel- 



Jos 21 :2 they were then at Shiloh in Canaan. They said to them, Through Moses, Yahweh ordered us to be 
given towns to live in, with their pasture lands for our livestock”. 

Jos 21 :3 In compliance with Yahweh’s order, the Israelites consequently and from their own heritage gave the 
Levites the following towns with their pasture lands: 

Jos 21 :4 Lots were cast for the clans of the Kohathites: to those Levites who were sons of Aaron the priest, fell 
thirteen towns from the tribes of Judah, Simeon and Benjamin; 

Jos 21 :5 to the other sons of Kohath, by clans, 

Jos 21 :6 fell ten towns from the tribes of Ephraim, Dan, and the half-tribe of Manasseh. To the sons of Gershon, 
by clans, fell thirteen towns from the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali and the half-tribe of Manasseh in 
Bashan. 

Jos 21 :7 To the sons of Merari, by clans, fell twelve towns from the tribes of Reuben, Gad and Zebulun. 

Jos 21 :8 The Israelites assigned these towns and their pasture lands to the Levites by lot, as Yahweh had 
ordered through Moses. 

Jos 21 :9 From the tribe of Judah and the tribe of Simeon, they gave the towns named below. 

Jos 21:10 The first portion was for the sons of Aaron, belonging to the clans of the Kohathites, to the sons of 
Levi, since the first lot was theirs. 

Jos 21:11 They gave them Kiriath-Arba, Anak’s father’s town — now Hebron — in the highlands of Judah, with its 
surrounding pasture lands. 

Jos 21:12 The fields and villages of this town, however, they gave to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his property. 
Jos 21:13 To the sons of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron, a city of refuge for those who had killed, with its 
pasture lands, as well as Libnah with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21:14 Jattir with its pasture lands, Eshtemoa with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21:15 Holon with its pasture lands, Debir with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21:16 Ashan with its pasture lands, Juttah with its pasture lands, and Beth-Shemesh with its pasture lands: 
nine towns taken from these two tribes; 

Jos 21:17 and, from the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with its pasture lands, Geba with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21:18 Anathoth with its pasture lands and Almon with its pasture lands: four towns. 

Jos 21:19 Total number of towns for the priests, the sons of Aaron: thirteen towns with their pasture lands. 

Jos 21 :20 As regards the clans of the sons of Kohath, those Levites still left of the sons of Kohath, the towns of 
their lot were taken from the tribe of Ephraim. 

Jos 21 :21 They were given Shechem, a city of refuge for those who had killed, with its pasture lands, in the 
highlands of Ephraim, as well as Gezer with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21 :22 Kibzaim with its pasture lands, and Beth-Horon with its pasture lands: four towns; 

Jos 21 :23 from the tribe of Dan, Elteke with its pasture lands, Gibbethon with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21 :24 Aijalon with its pasture lands and Gath-Rimmon with its pasture lands: four towns; 

Jos 21 :25 and, from the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taanach with its pasture lands and Jibleam with its pasture 
lands: two towns. 

Jos 21 :26 In all: ten towns with their pasture lands for the remaining clans of the sons of Kohath. 

Jos 21 .21 To the sons of Gershon, of the levitical clans, were given: from the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in 
Bashan, a city of refuge for those who had killed, with its pasture lands, and Ashtaroth with its pasture lands — 
two towns; 

Jos 21 :28 from the tribe of Issachar, Kishion with its pasture lands, Dobrath with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21 :29 Jarmuth with its pasture lands and En-Gannim with its pasture lands — four towns; 

Jos 21:30 from the tribe of Asher, Mishal with its pasture lands, Abdon with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21 :31 Helkath with its pasture lands and Rehob with its pasture lands — four towns; 

Jos 21 :32 and, from the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee, a city of refuge for those who had killed, with its 
pasture lands, Hammoth-Dor with its pasture lands and Kartan with its pasture lands — three towns. 

Jos 21 :33 Total number of towns of the Gershonites, by clans: thirteen towns with their pasture lands. 

Jos 21 :34 To the clans of the sons of Merari, the remainder of the Levites, fell: from the tribe of Zebulun, 
Jokneam with its pasture lands, Kartah with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21 :35 Rimmon with its pasture lands and Nahalal with its pasture lands — four towns; 

Jos 21 :36 on the other side of the Jordan opposite Jericho, from the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the desert, on the 
tableland, a city of refuge for those who had killed, with its pasture lands, Jahaz with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21 :3 7 Kedemoth with its pasture lands and Mephaath with its pasture lands — four towns; 

Jos 21 :38 and, from the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead, a city of refuge for those who had killed, with its pasture 
lands, Mahanaim with its pasture lands, 

Jos 21 :39 Heshbon with its pasture lands and Jazer with its pasture lands — four towns. 

Jos 21 :40 Total number of towns forming the lot of the sons of Merari by clans, of the remaining levitical clans: 
twelve towns. 



Jos 21 :41 The total number of towns for the Levites in Israelite territory was forty-eight towns with their pasture 
lands. 

Jos 21 :42 These towns consisted in each case of the town itself and the pasture land round it. This was the 
case with all the towns. 

Jos 21 :43 This was how Yahweh gave the Israelites the entire country which he had sworn to give to their 
ancestors. They took possession of it and settled in it. 

Jos 21 :44 Yahweh granted them tranquillity on all their frontiers just as he had sworn to their ancestors and, of 
all their enemies, not one succeeded in resisting them. Yahweh put all their enemies at their mercy. 

Jos 21 :45 Of all the promises that Yahweh had made to the House of Israel, not one failed; all were fulfilled. 

Jos 22:1 Joshua then summoned the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh 

Jos 22:2 and said to them, “You have observed everything that Moses, servant of Yahweh, ordered you, and 

whenever I have given you an order you have listened to me. 

Jos 22:3 You have not deserted your brothers, from long ago until today, keeping the observance of the 
commandment of Yahweh your God. 

Jos 22:4 Now that Yahweh your God has granted your brothers the rest that he promised them, go back to your 
tents, to the country belonging to you which Moses, servant of Yahweh, gave you on the other side of the 
Jordan. 

Jos 22:5 But take great care to practise the commandments and the Law which Moses, servant of Yahweh, has 
given you: to love Yahweh your God, always to follow his paths, to keep his commandments, to be loyal to him 
and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul”. 

Jos 22:6 Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went home to their tents. 

Jos 22:7 To one half of the tribe of Manasseh, Moses had given a territory in Bashan; to the other half, Joshua 
gave another among their brothers on the west bank of the Jordan. As Joshua sent them home to their tents, he 
blessed them 

Jos 22:8 and said to them, “You are going back to your tents with great wealth, with a great deal of livestock, 
with silver and gold, bronze and iron and great quantities of clothing; share the spoils of your enemies with your 
brothers”. 

Jos 22:9 The Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned home, leaving the Israelites at 
Shiloh in Canaan, and made for Gilead, the territory which belonged to them as a result of Yahweh’s order given 
through Moses. 

Jos 22:10 When they came to the stone circle by the Jordan, in Canaanite territory, the Reubenites, the Gadites 
and the half-tribe of Manasseh built an altar there beside the Jordan, a large, imposing altar. 

Jos 22:1 1 This came to the ears of the Israelites. “Look”, the word went round, “the Reubenites, the Gadites and 
the half-tribe of Manasseh have built this altar on the Canaanite side, near the stone circle by the Jordan, on the 
Israelites’ bank”. 

Jos 22:12 At this news, the whole community of the Israelites mustered at Shiloh, to march against them and 
make war on them. 

Jos 22:13 The Israelites sent the priest Phinehas son of Eleazar to the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half- 
tribe of Manasseh, in Gilead, 

Jos 22:14 and with him ten leading men, one man from a leading family from each of the tribes of Israel, each of 
them being head of his family in the clans of Israel. 

Jos 22:15 Having reached the Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, they said this: 
Jos 22:16 “The whole community of Israel says as follows, ‘What do you mean by this infidelity, which you have 
committed against the God of Israel by now repudiating your allegiance to Yahweh, and by building yourselves 
an altar with the intention now of rebelling against Yahweh? 

Jos 22:17 ‘Was the crime which we committed at Peor so slight — although we have not managed to purify 
ourselves from that even now, in spite of the plague which has ravaged the community of Yahweh- 
Jos 22:18 that you must now repudiate your allegiance to Yahweh? For since you are in rebellion against him 
today, tomorrow his anger will be aroused against the whole community of Israel. 

Jos 22:19 ‘Is the country in which you have settled unclean? Then cross over into the country where Yahweh 
has settled, there where Yahweh’s Dwelling now stands, and settle among us. But do not rebel against Yahweh 
or involve us in your rebellion by building a rival altar to the altar of Yahweh our God. 

Jos 22:20 When Achan son of Zerah was unfaithful to the curse of destruction, did not the retribution come 
down on the whole community of Israel, although he was only one man? Did he not have to die for his crime?’”. 
Jos 22:21 The Reubenites, the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh spoke in their turn and answered the 
heads of the clans of Israel: 

Jos 22:22 “The God of gods, Yahweh, the God of gods, Yahweh well knows, and let Israel know it too: if there 
has been rebellion or infidelity to Yahweh on our part, may he refuse to save us today! 

Jos 22:23 And if we have built ourselves an altar with the intention of repudiating our allegiance to Yahweh and 



of presenting burnt offering and oblation or of offering communion sacrifices on it, may Yahweh himself call us to 
account for it! 

Jos 22:24 The truth is, we have done this as a precaution: in the future, your descendants might say to ours, 
‘What connection do you have with Yahweh, God of Israel? 

Jos 22:25 Has not Yahweh set the frontier of the Jordan between us and you, you Reubenites and Gadites? 

You have no share in Yahweh’. Thus, your descendants would be the cause of stopping ours from fearing 
Yahweh. 

Jos 22:26 “So we said to each other, ‘Let us build this altar, not for burnt offerings or other sacrifices 
Jos 22:27 but as a witness between us and you and between our descendants after us, attesting that we too 
have the right to worship Yahweh, in his presence, with our burnt offerings, our victims and our communion 
sacrifices. And so, in the future your descendants will not be able to say to ours: You have no share in Yahweh’. 
Jos 22:28 And we furthermore said, ‘If ever it were to happen that they did say this either to us or to our 
descendants in the future, we should reply: Look at this structure, Yahweh’s altar, made by our ancestors not for 
burnt offerings or other sacrifices but as a witness between us and you’. 

Jos 22:29 Far be it from us to rebel against Yahweh or now to repudiate our allegiance to Yahweh by building 
an altar for burnt offerings or oblations or sacrifices, in rivalry with the altar of Yahweh our God that stands 
before his Dwelling!”. 

Jos 22:30 When the priest Phinehas, the leaders of the community and the heads of the clans of Israel who 
were with him, heard the words spoken by the Gadites, the Reubenites and the Manassehites, they approved of 
them. 

Jos 22:31 The priest Phinehas son of Eleazar then said to the Reubenites, the Gadites and the Manassehites, 
“Today, we can see that Yahweh is among us, since you have not been unfaithful to Yahweh in this matter; this 
means that you have spared the Israelites from Yahweh’s avenging hand”. 

Jos 22:32 The priest Phinehas son of Eleazar and the leaders left the Reubenites and the Gadites and went 
back from Gilead to Canaan and the Israelites, to whom they reported the answer. 

Jos 22:33 The Israelites were pleased to hear this; the Israelites gave thanks to God and spoke no more of 
marching against them to make war on them and to ravage the country inhabited by the Reubenites and the 
Gadites. 

Jos 22:34 The Reubenites and the Gadites called the altar … , “Because”, they said, “it will be a witness 
between us that Yahweh is God”. 

Jos 23:1 Now long after Yahweh had given Israel rest from all the enemies surrounding them — Joshua was old 
now, far advanced in years- 

Jos 23:2 Joshua summoned all Israel, their elders, leaders, judges and officials, and said to them, “I myself am 
old, far advanced in years; 

Jos 23:3 you for your part have witnessed all that Yahweh your God has done to all these nations for your sake; 
Yahweh your God himself has fought for you. 

Jos 23:4 Look, these nations still remaining, and all the nations which I have exterminated from the Jordan all 
the way to the Great Sea in the west, I have allotted to you as the heritage for your tribes. 

Jos 23:5 Yahweh your God will himself drive them out before you; he will dispossess them before you and you 
will take possession of their country, as Yahweh your God has promised you. 

Jos 23:6 “So be very firm about keeping and doing everything written in the Book of the Law of Moses, not 
swerving from that either to right or to left. 

Jos 23:7 Never mix with the peoples who are still left beside you. Do not utter the names of their gods, do not 
swear by them, do not serve them and do not bow down to them. 

Jos 23:8 On the contrary, you must be loyal to Yahweh your God as you have been till now. 

Jos 23:9 Yahweh has dispossessed great and powerful nations before you, and no one so far has been able to 
resist you. 

Jos 23:10 One man of you was able to rout a thousand of them, since Yahweh your God was himself fighting for 
you, as he had promised you. 

Jos 23:1 1 Be very careful, as you value your life, to love Yahweh your God. 

Jos 23:12 “But should you in any way relapse, if you make friends with the remnant of these nations still living 
beside you, if you intermarry with them, if you mix with them and they with you, 

Jos 23:13 then know for certain that Yahweh your God will stop dispossessing these nations before you, and for 
you they will be a snare, a pitfall, thorns in your sides and thistles in your eyes, until you vanish from this fine 
country given you by Yahweh your God. 

Jos 23:14 “Today, you see, I am going the way of all the earth. Acknowledge with all your heart and soul that of 
all the promises made to you by Yahweh your God, not one has failed: all have been fulfilled — not one has 
failed. 

Jos 23:15 “As every promise made to you by Yahweh your God has been fulfilled for you, by the same token 



Yahweh will fulfil all his threats against you, even to exterminating you from this fine country given you by 
Yahweh your God. 

Jos 23:16 “For if you violate the covenant which Yahweh your God has imposed on you, if you go and serve 
other gods and bow down to them, then Yahweh’s anger will be roused against you and you will quickly vanish 
from the fine country which he has given you”. 

Jos 24:1 Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel together at Shechem; he then summoned all the elders of 
Israel, its leaders, judges and officials, and they presented themselves in God’s presence. 

Jos 24:2 Joshua then said to all the people: “Yahweh, the God of Israel, says this, ‘From time immemorial, your 
ancestors, Terah, father of Abraham and Nahor, lived beyond the River, and served other gods. 

Jos 24:3 I then brought your ancestor Abraham from beyond the River and led him through the length and 
breadth of Canaan. I increased his descendants and I gave him Isaac. 

Jos 24:4 To Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau. To Esau I gave possession of the mountainous country of Seir. 

Jacob and his sons went down into Egypt. 

Jos 24:5 I then sent Moses and Aaron, and plagued Egypt with the wonders that I worked there; finally I brought 
you out. 

Jos 24:6 I brought your ancestors out of Egypt, and you came to the Sea; the Egyptians pursued your ancestors 
with chariots and horsemen, to the Sea of Reeds. 

Jos 24:7 They then called to Yahweh, and he spread a thick fog between you and the Egyptians, and made the 
sea go back on them and cover them. You saw with your own eyes what I did in Egypt. Then, for a long while, 
you lived in the desert. 

Jos 24:8 I then brought you into the country of the Amorites, who used to live on the further side of the Jordan; 
they made war on you and I put them at your mercy; after which, you took possession of their country, since I 
destroyed them before you. 

Jos 24:9 Next, Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, rose to make war on Israel, and sent for Balaam son of Beor 
to come and curse you. 

Jos 24:10 But I would not listen to Balaam; instead, he had to bless you, and I saved you from his power. 

Jos 24:1 1 ‘You then crossed the Jordan and came to Jericho, but the inhabitants of Jericho made war on you: 
Amorites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hittites, Girgashites, Hivites and Jebusites, and I put them all at your mercy. 
Jos 24:12 I sent hornets ahead of you, which drove out the two Amorite kings before you; this was not the work 
of your sword or of your bow. 

Jos 24:13 And now I have given you a country for which you have not toiled, towns you have not built, although 
you live in them, vineyards and olive groves you have not planted, although you eat their fruit’. 

Jos 24:14 “So now, fear Yahweh and serve him truly and sincerely; banish the gods whom your ancestors 
served beyond the River and in Egypt, and serve Yahweh. 

Jos 24:15 But if serving Yahweh seems a bad thing to you, today you must make up your minds whom you do 
mean to serve, whether the gods whom your ancestors served beyond the River, or the gods of the Amorites in 
whose country you are now living. As regards my family and me, we shall serve Yahweh”. 

Jos 24:16 The people replied, “Far be it from us to desert Yahweh and to serve other gods! 

Jos 24:17 Yahweh our God was the one who brought us and our ancestors here from Egypt, from the place of 
slave-labour, who worked those great wonders before our eyes and who kept us safe all along the way we 
travelled and among all the peoples through whom we passed. 

Jos 24:18 And Yahweh has driven all the nations out for us, including the Amorites who used to live in the 
country. We too shall serve Yahweh, for he is our God”. 

Jos 24:19 Joshua then said to the people, “You will not be able to serve Yahweh, since he is a holy God, he is a 
jealous God who will not tolerate either your misdeeds or your sins. 

Jos 24:20 If you desert Yahweh and serve the foreigners’ gods, he will turn and maltreat you anew and, in spite 
of having been good to you in the past, will destroy you”. 

Jos 24:21 The people replied to Joshua, “No! Yahweh is the one we mean to serve”. 

Jos 24:22 Joshua then said to the people, “You are witnesses to yourselves that you have chosen Yahweh, to 
serve him”. They replied, “Witnesses we are!”. 

Jos 24:23 Then banish the foreign gods which you have with you and give your allegiance to Yahweh, God of 
Israel!”. 

Jos 24:24 The people replied to Joshua, “Yahweh our God is the one whom we shall serve; his voice we shall 
obey!”. 

Jos 24:25 That day Joshua made a covenant for the people; he laid down a statute and ordinance for them at 
Shechem. 

Jos 24:26 Joshua wrote these words in the Book of the Law of God. Fie then took a large stone and set it up 
there, under the oak tree in Yahweh’s sanctuary. 

Jos 24:27 Joshua then said to all the people, “Look, this stone will be a witness to us, since it has heard all the 



words that Yahweh has spoken to us: it will be a witness against you, in case you should deny your God”. 

Jos 24:28 Joshua then dismissed the people, every one to his own heritage. 

Jos 24:29 After this, Joshua son of Nun, servant of Yahweh, died; he was a hundred and ten years old. 

Jos 24:30 He was buried on the estate which he had received as his heritage, at Timnath-Serah which lies in 
the highlands of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash. 

Jos 24:31 Israel served Yahweh throughout the lifetime of Joshua and throughout the lifetime of those elders 
who outlived Joshua and had known all the deeds which Yahweh had done for the sake of Israel. 

Jos 24:32 As regards the bones of Joseph, which the Israelites had brought from Egypt, these were buried at 
Shechem in the plot of ground which Jacob had bought for a hundred pieces of silver from the sons of Hamor 
father of Shechem, and which had become the heritage of the sons of Joseph. 

Jos 24:33 Eleazar son of Aaron then died and was buried at Gibeah, the town of his son Phinehas, which had 
been given to him in the highlands of Ephraim. 

Jdg 1:1 Now after Joshua’s death, the Israelites consulted Yahweh, asking, “Which of us is to march on the 
Canaanites first, to make war on them?”. 

Jdg 1 :2 And Yahweh replied, “Judah is to march on them first; I am delivering the country into his hands”. 

Jdg 1:3 Judah then said to his brother Simeon, “March with me into the territory allotted to me; we shall make 
war on the Canaanites, and then I in my turn shall march into your territory with you”. And Simeon marched with 
him. 

Jdg 1 :4 So Judah marched on them, and Yahweh delivered the Canaanites and Perizzites into their hands, and 
they defeated them at Bezek-ten thousand of them! 

Jdg 1 :5 At Bezek they came upon Adoni-Bezek; they joined battle with him and defeated the Canaanites and 
Perizzites. 

Jdg 1 :6 Adoni-Bezek took to flight, but they chased and captured him and cut off his thumbs and big toes. 

Jdg 1 :7 Adoni-Bezek said, “Seventy kings with their thumbs and big toes cut off used to pick up the crumbs 
under my table. As I did, God does to me”. He was taken to Jerusalem, and there he died. 

Jdg 1 :8 (The sons of Judah attacked Jerusalem and took it: they put its people to the sword and set fire to the 
city.) 

Jdg 1 :9 After this the sons of Judah went down to make war on the Canaanites who were living in the highlands, 
the Negeb and the lowlands. 

Jdg 1:10 Judah next marched on the Canaanites living in Hebron — the name of Hebron in olden days was 
Kiriath-Arba — and beat Sheshai, Ahiman and Talmai. 

Jdg 1:11 From there, he marched on the inhabitants of Debir — the name of Debir in olden days was Kiriath- 
Sepher. 

Jdg 1:12 Caleb said, “To the man who conquers and captures Kiriath-Sepher, I shall give my daughter Achsah 
as wife”. 

Jdg 1:13 The man who captured it was Othniel son of Kenaz, younger brother of Caleb, who gave him his 
daughter Achsah as wife. 

Jdg 1:14 When she arrived, he urged her to ask her father for arable land, but when she alighted from the 
donkey and Caleb asked her, “What is the matter?”. 

Jdg 1:15 she said to him, “Grant me a blessing! As the land you have given me is the Negeb, give me springs of 
water, too!”. So Caleb gave her what she wanted: the upper springs and the lower springs. 

Jdg 1:16 The sons of Hobab the Kenite, father-in-law of Moses, marched up with the sons of Judah from the 
City of Palm Trees into the desert of Judah lying in the Negeb of Arad, where they went and settled among the 
people. 

Jdg 1:17 Judah then set out with his brother Simeon. They beat the Canaanites who lived in Zephath and 
delivered it over to the curse of destruction; hence the town was given the name of Hormah. 

Jdg 1:18 Judah then captured Gaza and its territory, Ashkelon and its territory, Ekron and its territory. And 
Yahweh was with Judah, who made himself master of the highlands; 

Jdg 1:19 he could not, however, dispossess the inhabitants of the plain, since they had iron chariots. 

Jdg 1 :20 As Moses had directed, Hebron was given to Caleb, and he drove the three sons of Anak out of it. 

Jdg 1 :21 As regards the Jebusites living in Jerusalem, the sons of Benjamin did not dispossess them, and the 
Jebusites have been living in Jerusalem with the sons of Benjamin ever since. 

Jdg 1 :22 Similarly, the House of Joseph marched on Bethel, and Yahweh was with them. 

Jdg 1 :23 The House of Joseph made a reconnaissance of Bethel. (In olden days, the name of the town was 
Luz.) 

Jdg 1 :24 The scouts saw a man coming out of the town and said to him, “Show us how to get into the town and 
we shall show you faithful love”. 

Jdg 1 :25 And when he had shown them a way into the town, they put the town to the sword but let the man and 
his whole clan go. 



Jdg 1 :26 The man went off to the country of the Hittites and built a town which he called Luz; and that has been 
its name ever since. 

Jdg 1 .21 Manasseh did not dispossess Beth-Shean and its dependencies, nor Taanach and its dependencies, 
nor the inhabitants of Dor and its dependencies, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and its dependencies, nor the 
inhabitants of Megiddo and its dependencies; in those parts the Canaanites held their ground. 

Jdg 1 :28 But when the Israelites became stronger, they subjected the Canaanites to forced labour, although 
they did not dispossess them. 

Jdg 1 :29 Nor did Ephraim dispossess the Canaanites living in Gezer; thus, the Canaanites went on living in 
Gezer with him. 

Jdg 1 :30 Zebulun did not dispossess the inhabitants of Kitron or of Nahalol. The Canaanites lived on with 
Zebulun but were subjected to forced labour. 

Jdg 1 :31 Asher did not dispossess the inhabitants of Acco, nor those of Sidon, of Mahalab, of Achzib, of Helbah, 
of Aphek or of Rehob. 

Jdg 1 :32 So the Asherites lived among the Canaanite inhabitants of the country, not having dispossessed them. 
Jdg 1:33 Naphtali did not dispossess the inhabitants of Beth-Shemesh or of Beth-Anath; they settled among the 
Canaanite inhabitants of the country, but the inhabitants of Beth-Shemesh and of Beth-Anath were subjected to 
forced labour for them. 

Jdg 1 :34 The Amorites drove the Danites back into the highlands and would not let them come down into the 
plain. 

Jdg 1 :35 The Amorites held their ground at Har — Heres and Shaalbim, but when the hand of the House of 
Joseph grew heavier, they were subjected to forced labour. ( 

Jdg 1 :36 The territory of the Edomites begins at the Ascent of Scorpions, runs to the Rock and continues on 
upwards.) 

Jdg 2:1 The Angel of Yahweh went up from Gilgal to Bethel and said, “I have brought you out of Egypt and led 
you into this country, which I promised on oath to your ancestors. I said, ‘I shall never break my covenant with 
you. 

Jdg 2:2 You for your part must make no covenant with the inhabitants of this country; you will destroy their 
altars’. But you have not listened to my voice. What is the reason for this? 

Jdg 2:3 Very well, I now say this, ‘I am not going to drive these nations out before you. They will become your 
oppressors, and their gods will be a snare for you’. 

Jdg 2:4 When the angel of Yahweh had spoken these words to all the Israelites, the people began to wail at the 
top of their voices. 

Jdg 2:5 And they called the place Bochim, and offered sacrifices to Yahweh there. 

Jdg 2:6 Joshua having dismissed the people, the Israelites then went away, each one to his own heritage, to 
occupy the country. 

Jdg 2:7 The people served Yahweh throughout the lifetime of Joshua and throughout the lifetime of those elders 
who outlived Joshua and had known all the great deeds which Yahweh had done for the sake of Israel. 

Jdg 2:8 Joshua son of Nun, servant of Yahweh, was a hundred and ten years old when he died. 

Jdg 2:9 He was buried on the estate which he had received as his heritage at Timnath-Heres in the highlands of 
Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash. 

Jdg 2:10 And when that whole generation had been gathered to its ancestors, another generation followed it 
which knew neither Yahweh nor the deeds which he had done for the sake of Israel. 

Jdg 2:1 1 The Israelites then did what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes and served the Baals. 

Jdg 2:12 They deserted Yahweh, God of their ancestors, who had brought them out of Egypt, and they followed 
other gods, from those of the surrounding peoples. They bowed down to these; they provoked Yahweh; 

Jdg 2:13 they deserted Yahweh to serve Baal and Astartes. 

Jdg 2:14 Then Yahweh’s anger grew hot against Israel. He handed them over to pillagers who plundered them; 
he delivered them to the enemies surrounding them, and they were no longer able to resist their enemies. 

Jdg 2:15 Whenever they mounted an expedition, Yahweh’s hand was there to foil them, as Yahweh had told 
them and as Yahweh had sworn to them, so that they were in dire distress. 

Jdg 2:16 Yahweh then appointed them judges, who rescued them from the hands of their plunderers. 

Jdg 2:17 But even to their judges they refused to listen. They prostituted themselves to other gods and bowed 
down before these. Very quickly they left the path which their ancestors had trodden in obedience to the orders 
of Yahweh; they did not follow their example. 

Jdg 2:18 When Yahweh appointed judges for them, Yahweh was with the judge and rescued them from the 
hands of their enemies as long as the judge lived, since Yahweh relented at their groans under their persecutors 
and oppressors. 

Jdg 2:19 But once the judge was dead, they relapsed into even worse corruption than their ancestors. They 
followed other gods; they served them and bowed before them and would not give up the practices and stubborn 



ways of their ancestors at all. 

Jdg 2:20 Yahweh’s anger then blazed out against Israel, and he said, “Since this people has broken the 
covenant which I laid down for their ancestors, since they have not listened to my voice, 

Jdg 2:21 in future I shall not drive before them any one of those nations which Joshua left when he died, 

Jdg 2:22 in order, by means of them, to put Israel to the test, to see whether or not they would tread the paths of 
Yahweh as once their ancestors had trodden them”. 

Jdg 2:23 Hence, Yahweh allowed these nations to remain; he did not hurry to drive them out, and did not deliver 
them into the hands of Joshua. 

Jdg 3:1 These are the nations which Yahweh allowed to remain, by their means to put all those Israelites to the 
test who had not experienced any of the Canaanite wars 

Jdg 3:2 (this was only to instruct the Israelites’ descendants, to teach them the art of war, those at least who 
had not experienced it previously): 

Jdg 3:3 the five chiefs of the Philistines, all the Canaanites, the Sidonians, and the Hittites who lived in the 
range of the Lebanon, from the uplands of Baal-Hermon to the Pass of Hamath. 

Jdg 3:4 They were used to put Israel to the test and see if they would keep the orders which Yahweh had given 
their ancestors through Moses. 

Jdg 3:5 The Israelites lived among the Canaanites, Hittites and Amorites, the Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites; 
Jdg 3:6 they married their daughters, they gave their own sons to their daughters and they served their gods. 

Jdg 3:7 The Israelites did what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes. They forgot Yahweh their God and served Baals and 
Asherahs. 

Jdg 3:8 Then Yahweh’s anger blazed out against Israel: he handed them over to Cushan-Rishathaim king of 
Edom, and the Israelites were enslaved to Cushan-Rishathaim for eight years. 

Jdg 3:9 The Israelites then cried to Yahweh and Yahweh raised for the Israelites a deliverer who rescued them, 
Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother. 

Jdg 3:10 The spirit of Yahweh was on him; he became judge in Israel and set out for war. Yahweh delivered 
Cushan-Rishathaim king of Edom into his hands, and he triumphed over Cushan- Rishathaim. 

Jdg 3:1 1 The country then had peace for forty years. Othniel son of Kenaz then died. 

Jdg 3:12 Again the Israelites began doing what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes, and Yahweh strengthened Eglon king 
of Moab against Israel, since they were doing what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes. 

Jdg 3:13 Eglon in conjunction with the sons of Ammon and Amalek marched on Israel, beat them and captured 
the City of Palm Trees. 

Jdg 3:14 The Israelites were enslaved to Eglon king of Moab for eighteen years. 

Jdg 3:15 The Israelites then cried to Yahweh, and Yahweh raised a deliverer for them, Ehud son of Gera, a 
Benjaminite; he was left-handed. The Israelites appointed him to take their tribute to Eglon king of Moab. 

Jdg 3:16 Ehud made himself a dagger — it was double-edged and a foot long — and strapped it under his 
clothes on his right thigh. 

Jdg 3:17 He presented the tribute to Eglon king of Moab. This Eglon was a very fat man. 

Jdg 3:18 Having presented the tribute, Ehud sent away the men who had been carrying it; 

Jdg 3:19 but he himself, on reaching the Idols which are near Gilgal, went back and said, “I have a secret 
message for you, O king”. The king commanded silence, and all his attendants withdrew. 

Jdg 3:20 Ehud went up to him; he was sitting in his private room upstairs, where it was cool. Ehud said to him, “I 
have a message from God for you, O king”. The latter immediately rose from his seat. 

Jdg 3:21 Then Ehud, reaching with his left hand, drew the dagger he was carrying on his right thigh and thrust it 
into the king’s belly. 

Jdg 3:22 The hilt too went in after the blade, and the fat closed over the blade, since Ehud did not pull the 
dagger out of his belly again. 

Jdg 3:23 Ehud went out through the privies, having shut and bolted the doors of the upstairs room behind him. 
Jdg 3:24 When he had gone, the servants came back and looked; the doors of the upstairs room were bolted. 
They thought, “He is probably covering his feet in the inner part of the cool room”. 

Jdg 3:25 They waited until they became embarrassed, but still he did not open the doors of the upstairs room. 
Eventually, they took the key and opened the door; and there lay their master, dead, on the ground. 

Jdg 3:26 Meanwhile, Ehud had got away, passed the Idols and made good his escape to safety in Seirah. 

Jdg 3:27 Once there, he sounded the horn in the highlands of Ephraim, and the Israelites came down from the 
hills with him at their head. 

Jdg 3:28 And he said to them, “Follow me, because Yahweh has delivered your enemy Moab into your hands”. 
So they followed him, seized the fords of the Jordan against Moab and allowed no one to cross. 

Jdg 3:29 On that occasion they beat the Moabites, some ten thousand men, all tough and seasoned fighters, 
and not one escaped. 

Jdg 3:30 That day Moab was humbled under the hand of Israel, and the country had peace for eighty years. 



Jdg 3:31 After him came Shamgar son of Anath. He routed six hundred of the Philistines with an ox-goad; he 
too was a deliverer of Israel. 

Jdg 4:1 Once Ehud was dead, the Israelites again began doing what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes, 

Jdg 4:2 and Yahweh handed them over to Jabin king of Canaan, who reigned at Hazor. The commander of his 
army was Sisera, who lived in Haroshet-ha-Goiim. 

Jdg 4:3 The Israelites then cried to Yahweh; for Jabin had nine hundred iron chariots and had cruelly oppressed 
the Israelites for twenty years. 

Jdg 4:4 Deborah, a prophetess, wife of Lappidoth, was judging Israel at the time. 

Jdg 4:5 She used to sit under Deborah’s Palm between Ramah and Bethel in the highlands of Ephraim, and the 
Israelites would come to her for justice. 

Jdg 4:6 She sent for Barak son of Abinoam from Kedesh in Naphtali, and said to him, “Has not Yahweh, God of 
Israel, commanded, ‘Go! March to Mount Tabor and with you take ten thousand of the sons of Naphtali and the 
sons of Zebulun. 

Jdg 4:7 I shall entice Sisera, the commander of Jabin’s army, to encounter you at the Torrent of Kishon with his 
chariots and troops; and I shall put him into your power?’ “ 

Jdg 4:8 Barak replied, “If you come with me, I shall go; if you will not come, I shall not go, for I do not know how 
to choose the day when the angel of Yahweh will grant me success”. 

Jdg 4:9 “I shall go with you then”, she said, “but, the way you are going about it, the glory will not be yours; for 
Yahweh will deliver Sisera into the hands of a woman”. Deborah then stood up and went with Barak to Kedesh. 
Jdg 4:10 Barak summoned Zebulun and Naphtali. Ten thousand men marched behind him, and Deborah went 
with him. 

Jdg 4:1 1 Heber the Kenite had parted company with the tribe of Kain and with the sons of Hobab, father-in-law 
of Moses; he had pitched his tent near the Oak of Zaanannim, not far from Kedesh. 

Jdg 4:12 Sisera was informed that Barak son of Abinoam had encamped on Mount Tabor. 

Jdg 4:13 Sisera summoned all his chariots — nine hundred iron chariots — and all the troops he had, from 
Harosheth-ha-Goiim to the Torrent of Kishon. 

Jdg 4:14 Deborah said to Barak, “Up! For today is the day when Yahweh has put Sisera into your power. Is not 
Yahweh marching at your head?”. And Barak charged down from Mount Tabor with ten thousand men behind 
him. 

Jdg 4:15 At Barak’s advance, Yahweh struck terror into Sisera, all his chariots and his entire army. Sisera leapt 
down from his chariot and fled on foot. 

Jdg 4:16 Barak pursued the chariots and the army as far as Harosheth-ha-Goiim. Sisera’s whole army fell by 
the edge of the sword; not one man was spared. 

Jdg 4:17 Sisera meanwhile fled on foot towards the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite. For there was 
peace between Jabin king of Hazor and the family of Heber the Kenite. 

Jdg 4:18 Jael came out to meet Sisera and said to him, “Stay here, my lord, with me; do not be afraid!”. He 
stayed with her in her tent, and she covered him with a rug. 

Jdg 4:19 He said to her, “Please give me a little water to drink, for I am thirsty”. She opened the skin of milk, 
gave him some to drink and covered him up again. 

Jdg 4:20 Then he said to her, “Stand at the tent door, and if anyone comes and questions you — if he asks, ‘Is 
there a man here?’. say, ‘No’”. 

Jdg 4:21 But Jael the wife of Heber took a tent-peg and picked up a mallet; she crept up softly to him and drove 
the peg into his temple right through to the ground. He was lying fast asleep, worn out; and so he died. 

Jdg 4:22 And now Barak came up in pursuit of Sisera. Jael went out to meet him and said, “Come in, and I will 
show you the man you are looking for”. He went into her tent; and there was Sisera dead, with the tent-peg 
through his temple. 

Jdg 4:23 Thus God that day humbled Jabin king of Canaan before the Israelites. 

Jdg 4:24 And the Israelites bore down more and more heavily on that king of Canaan, Jabin, until he was utterly 
destroyed. 

Jdg 5:1 They sang a song that day, Deborah and Barak son of Abinoam, and the words were: 

Jdg 5:2 That the warriors in Israel unbound their hair, that the people came forward with a will, bless Yahweh! 
Jdg 5:3 Listen, you kings! Give ear, you princes! From me, from me comes a song for Yahweh. I shall glorify 
Yahweh, God of Israel. 

Jdg 5:4 Yahweh, when you set out from Seir, when you marched from the field of Edom, the earth shook, the 
heavens pelted, the clouds pelted down water. 

Jdg 5:5 The mountains melted before Yahweh of Sinai, before Yahweh, God of Israel. 

Jdg 5:6 In the days of Shamgar son of Anath, in the days of Jael, there were no more caravans; those who went 
forth on their travels took their way along by-paths. 

Jdg 5:7 The villages in Israel were no more, they were no more until you arose, O Deborah, until you arose, 



mother of Israel! 

Jdg 5:8 They were choosing new gods when war was at the gates. Was there one shield, one spear to be found 
among the forty thousand men in Israel? 

Jdg 5:9 My heart is with the leaders of Israel, with the people who came forward with a will! Bless Yahweh! 

Jdg 5:10 You who ride white donkeys and sit on saddle-blankets as you ride, and you who go on foot, 

Jdg 5:1 1 sing — to the sound of the shepherds at the watering places! There they extol Yahweh’s blessings, his 
saving acts for his villages in Israel! (Then Yahweh’s people marched down to the gates.) 

Jdg 5:12 Awake, awake, Deborah! Awake, awake, declaim a song! Take heart, to your feet, Barak, capture your 
captors, son of Abinoam! 

Jdg 5:13 Then Israel marched down to the gates; like champions, Yahweh’s people marched down to fight for 
him! 

Jdg 5:14 The princes of Ephraim are in the valley. Behind you, Benjamin is in your ranks. Captains have come 
down from Machir, those who wield the commander’s staff, from Zebulun. 

Jdg 5:15 The princes of Issachar are with Deborah; Naphtali, with Barak, in the valley follows in hot pursuit. In 
the clans of Reuben there was much searching of heart. 

Jdg 5:16 Why did you stay among the sheepfolds, listening for the whistle, with the flocks? (In the clans of 
Reuben, there was much searching of heart.) 

Jdg 5:17 Gilead stayed on the other side of the Jordan, and why should Dan have stayed aboard ship? Asher 
remained beside the sea, peacefully living within his ports. 

Jdg 5:18 Zebulun is a people who have braved death, Naphtali too, on the high ground of the country. 

Jdg 5:19 The kings came and they fought, how they fought, those kings of Canaan, at Taanach, near the 
Waters of Megiddo, but no booty of silver did they take! 

Jdg 5:20 The stars fought from heaven, from their orbits they fought against Sisera. 

Jdg 5:21 The torrent of Kishon swept them away, the torrent of old, the torrent of Kishon. -March on, be strong 
my soul! 

Jdg 5:22 The horses’ hooves then hammer the ground: galloping, galloping go his steeds. 

Jdg 5:23 “Curse Meroz”, said the Angel of Yahweh, “curse, curse the people living there for not having come to 
Yahweh’s help, to Yahweh’s help as warriors!”. 

Jdg 5:24 Most blessed of women be Jael (the wife of Heber the Kenite); of tent-dwelling women, may she be 
most blessed! 

Jdg 5:25 He asked for water; she gave him milk; she offered him curds in a lordly dish. 

Jdg 5:26 She reached her hand out to seize the peg, her right hand to seize the workman’s mallet. She 
hammered Sisera, she crushed his head, she pierced his temple and shattered it. 

Jdg 5:27 Between her feet, he crumpled, he fell, he lay; at her feet, he crumpled, he fell. Where he crumpled, 
there he fell, destroyed. 

Jdg 5:28 At the window, she leans and watches, Sisera’s mother, through the lattice, “Why is his chariot so long 
coming? Why so delayed the hoof-beats from his chariot?”. 

Jdg 5:29 The wisest of her ladies answers, and she to herself repeats, 

Jdg 5:30 “Are they not collecting and sharing out the spoil: a girl, two girls for each warrior; a booty of coloured 
and embroidered stuff for Sisera, one scarf, two embroidered scarves for me!”. 

Jdg 5:31 So perish all your enemies, Yahweh! And let those who love you be like the sun when he emerges in 
all his strength! And the country had peace for forty years. 

Jdg 6:1 The Israelites did what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes, and for seven years Yahweh handed them over to 
Midian; 

Jdg 6:2 and Midian bore down heavily on Israel. To escape from the Midianites the Israelites used the mountain 
clefts and the caves and shelters. 

Jdg 6:3 Whenever Israel sowed seed the Midianites would march up with Amalek and the sons of the East. 

They would march on Israel. 

Jdg 6:4 They would pitch camp on their territory and destroy the produce of the country as far as Gaza. They 
left Israel nothing to live on, not a sheep or an ox or a donkey, 

Jdg 6:5 for they came up as thick as locusts with their cattle and their tents; they and their camels were 
innumerable, they invaded the country to pillage it. 

Jdg 6:6 Thus, Midian brought Israel to great distress, and the Israelites cried to Yahweh. 

Jdg 6:7 When the Israelites cried to Yahweh because of Midian, 

Jdg 6:8 Yahweh sent a prophet to the Israelites. He said to them, “This is what Yahweh, God of Israel, says, ‘It 
was I who brought you out of Egypt, and led you out of the place of slave-labour. 

Jdg 6:9 I rescued you from the power of the Egyptians and from the power of all who oppressed you. I drove 
them out before you and gave their country to you. 

Jdg 6:10 And I said to you: I am Yahweh your God. You are not to fear the gods of the Amorites in whose 



country you are now living. But you have not listened to my voice’”. 

Jdg 6:1 1 The Angel of Yahweh came and sat under the terebinth at Ophrah which belonged to Joash of 
Abiezer. Gideon his son was threshing wheat inside the wine-press, to keep it hidden from Midian, 

Jdg 6:12 and the Angel of Yahweh appeared to him and said, “Yahweh is with you, valiant warrior!”. 

Jdg 6:13 Gideon replied, “Excuse me, my lord, but if Yahweh is with us, why is all this happening to us? And 
where are all his miracles which our ancestors used to tell us about when they said, ‘Did not Yahweh bring us 
out of Egypt?’. But now Yahweh has deserted us; he has abandoned us to Midian”. 

Jdg 6:14 At this, Yahweh turned to him and said, “Go in this strength of yours, and you will rescue Israel from 
the power of Midian. Am I not sending you myself?”. 

Jdg 6:15 Gideon replied, “Forgive me, my lord, but how can I deliver Israel? My clan is the weakest in Manasseh 
and I am the least important of my father’s family”. 

Jdg 6:16 Yahweh replied, “I shall be with you and you will crush Midian as though it were one man”. 

Jdg 6:17 Gideon said, “If I have found favour in your sight, give me a sign that you are speaking to me. 

Jdg 6:18 Please do not go away from here until I come back to you, bringing you my offering and laying it before 
you”. And he replied, “I shall stay until you come back”. 

Jdg 6:19 Gideon went away, he prepared a young goat and from an <i>ephah</i> of flour he made unleavened cakes. 
He put the meat into a basket and the broth into a pot, then brought it all to him under the terebinth. As he 
approached, 

Jdg 6:20 the Angel of Yahweh said to him, “Take the meat and unleavened cakes, put them on this rock and 
pour the broth over them”. Gideon did so. 

Jdg 6:21 The Angel of Yahweh then stretched out the tip of the staff which he was carrying, and touched the 
meat and unleavened cakes. Fire sprang from the rock and consumed the meat and unleavened cakes, and the 
Angel of Yahweh vanished before his eyes. 

Jdg 6:22 Gideon then knew that this was the Angel of Yahweh, and he said, “Alas, my Lord Yahweh! Now I have 
seen the Angel of Yahweh face to face!”. 

Jdg 6:23 Yahweh answered, “Peace be with you; have no fear; you will not die”. 

Jdg 6:24 Gideon built an altar there to Yahweh and called it Yahweh-Peace. This altar stands in our own day at 
Ophrah of Abiezer. 

Jdg 6:25 Now that night, Yahweh said to Gideon, “Take your father’s bull, the seven-year-old bull, and pull down 
the altar to Baal belonging to your father and cut down the sacred pole beside it. 

Jdg 6:26 Then, on top of this strong-point, build a proper altar to Yahweh your God. Then take the bull and burn 
it as a burnt offering on the wood of the sacred pole which you have cut down”. 

Jdg 6:27 Gideon then took ten of his servants and did as Yahweh had ordered him. But, being too frightened of 
his family and of the townspeople to do it in daylight, he did it at night. 

Jdg 6:28 Next morning, when the townspeople got up, they found that the altar to Baal had been destroyed, the 
sacred pole standing beside it had been cut down and the bull had been sacrificed as a burnt offering on the 
newly built altar. 

Jdg 6:29 “Who has done this?”. they asked one another. They searched, made enquiries and declared, “Gideon 
son of Joash has done it”. 

Jdg 6:30 The townspeople then said to Joash, “Bring out your son; he must die for having destroyed Baal’s altar 
and cut down the sacred pole which stood beside it”. 

Jdg 6:31 To the people all crowding round him, Joash replied, “Is it your job to plead for Baal? Is it your job to 
champion his cause? (Anyone who pleads for Baal must be put to death before dawn.) If he is a god, let him 
plead for himself, now that Gideon has destroyed his altar”. 

Jdg 6:32 That day, Gideon was given the name Jerubbaal, because, they said, “Baal must plead against him, 
because he has destroyed his altar!”. 

Jdg 6:33 All Midian and Amalek and the sons of the East joined forces and, having crossed the Jordan, pitched 
camp in the plain of Jezreel. 

Jdg 6:34 And the spirit of Yahweh clothed Gideon around; he sounded the horn and Abiezer rallied behind him. 

Jdg 6:35 He sent messengers throughout Manasseh, and Manasseh too rallied behind him; he sent 

messengers to Asher, Zebulun and Naphtali, and they marched out to meet him. 

Jdg 6:36 Gideon said to God, “If it is really you delivering Israel by means of me, as you have said, 

Jdg 6:37 look, I am going to put a woollen fleece on the threshing-floor; if there is dew only on the fleece and all 

the ground stays dry, then I shall know that you will deliver Israel by means of me, as you have said”. 

Jdg 6:38 And so it happened. Early next morning, Gideon got up, squeezed the fleece and wrung enough dew 
out of the fleece to fill a cup. 

Jdg 6:39 Gideon then said to God, “Do not be angry with me if I speak just once more. Allow me to make the 
fleece-test just once more: let the fleece alone be dry and there be dew all over the ground!”. 

Jdg 6:40 And God did so that night. The fleece alone stayed dry, and there was dew all over the ground. 



Jdg 7:1 Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) got up very early, as did all the people who were with him; he pitched camp 
at En-Harod; the camp of Midian was north of his, under the Hill of Moreh in the valley. 

Jdg 7:2 Yahweh then said to Gideon, There are too many people with you for me to put Midian into their power; 
Israel might claim the credit for themselves at my expense: they might say, ‘My own hand has rescued me’. 

Jdg 7:3 So now make this proclamation to the people, ‘Anyone trembling with fear is to go back and watch from 
Mount Gilboa’”. Twenty-two thousand of the people went back, and ten thousand remained. 

Jdg 7:4 Yahweh said to Gideon, There are still too many people. Take them down to the waterside and I shall 
sort them out for you there. If I say of someöne, ‘He is to go with you’, that man is to go with you. And if I say of 
anyone, ‘He is not to go with you’, that man is not to go”. 

Jdg 7:5 So Gideon took the people down to the waterside, and Yahweh said to him, “All those who lap the water 
with their tongues, as a dog laps, put these on one side. And all those who kneel down to drink, put these on the 
other side”. 

Jdg 7:6 The number of those who lapped with their hands to their mouth was three hundred; all the rest of the 
people had knelt to drink. 

Jdg 7:7 Yahweh then said to Gideon, “With the three hundred who lapped the water, I shall rescue you and put 
Midian into your power. Let the people as a whole disperse to their homes”. 

Jdg 7:8 So they took the people’s provisions and their horns, and then Gideon sent all the Israelites back to their 
tents, keeping only the three hundred. The camp of Midian was below his in the valley. 

Jdg 7:9 Now it happened, that same night, that Yahweh said to him, “Get up and go down to the camp. I am 
putting it into your power. 

Jdg 7:10 If, however, you are nervous about going down, go down to the camp with your servant Purah; 

Jdg 7:1 1 listen to what they are saying, and that will encourage you to go down to the camp”. So, with his 
servant Purah, he went down to the edge of the outposts of the camp. 

Jdg 7:12 Midian, Amalek and all the sons of the East were deployed in the valley as thick as locusts; their 
camels were as innumerable as the sand on the seashore. 

Jdg 7:13 Gideon got there just as a man was telling his comrade a dream; he was saying, “This was the dream I 
had: a cake made of barley bread came rolling into the camp of Midian; it came to a tent, struck against it and 
turned it upside down”. 

Jdg 7:14 His comrade replied, “This can only be the sword of Gideon son of Joash the Israelite. God has put 
Midian and the whole camp into his power”. 

Jdg 7:15 When Gideon heard the dream thus told and interpreted, he bowed in reverence; he then went back to 
the camp of Israel and said, “On your feet, for Yahweh has put the camp of Midian into your power!”. 

Jdg 7:16 Gideon then divided his three hundred men into three groups. To each he gave a horn and an empty 
pitcher, with a torch inside each pitcher. 

Jdg 7:17 He said to them, “Watch me, and do as I do. When I reach the edge of the camp, whatever I do, you 
must do also. 

Jdg 7:18 I shall blow my horn, and so will all those who are with me; you too will then blow your horns all round 
the camp and shout, ‘For Yahweh and for Gideon!’. 

Jdg 7:19 Gideon and his hundred companions reached the edge of the camp at the beginning of the middle 
watch, when the new sentries had just been posted; they blew their horns and smashed the pitchers in their 
hands. 

Jdg 7:20 The three groups blew their horns and smashed their pitchers; with their left hands they grasped the 
torches, with their right hands the horns for blowing them; and they shouted, “The sword for Yahweh and for 
Gideon!”. 

Jdg 7:21 And they stood still, spaced out round the camp. The whole camp was thrown into confusion and the 
Midianites fled, shouting. 

Jdg 7:22 While the three hundred blew their horns, Yahweh made each man turn his sword against his comrade 
throughout the entire camp. They all fled as far as Beth-ha-Shittah in the direction of Zarethan, as far as the 
bank of Abel-Meholah opposite Tabbath. 

Jdg 7:23 The men of Israel mustered from Naphtali, Asher and all Manasseh, and pursued Midian. 

Jdg 7:24 Gideon sent messengers throughout the highlands of Ephraim to say, “Come down to meet Midian, 
seize the water-points ahead of them as far as Beth-Barah and the Jordan”. All the men of Ephraim mustered 
and seized the water-points as far as Beth-Barah and the Jordan. 

Jdg 7:25 They captured the two Midianite chieftains, Oreb and Zeeb; they killed Oreb at Oreb’s Rock and Zeeb 
at Zeeb’s Winepress. They pursued Midian; and they brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the 
other side of the Jordan. 

Jdg 8:1 Now the men of Ephraim said to Gideon, “What do you mean by treating us like this, not summoning us 
when you went to fight Midian?”. And they reproached him bitterly. 

Jdg 8:2 He replied, “What have I achieved, compared with you? Is not the gleaning of Ephraim’s grapes better 



than the vintage of Abiezer? 

Jdg 8:3 God delivered Oreb and Zeeb, the chieftains of Midian, into your power. What was I able to do, in 
comparison with what you have done?”. At these words, their anger with him died down. 

Jdg 8:4 Gideon reached the Jordan and crossed it, but he and his three hundred companions were exhausted 
with the pursuit. 

Jdg 8:5 So he said to the men of Succoth, “Please give my followers some loaves of bread, since they are 
exhausted, and I am pursuing Zebah and Zalmunna the kings of Midian”. 

Jdg 8:6 The headmen of Succoth replied, “Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna already in your grasp, that we 
should give bread to your army?”. 

Jdg 8:7 “Very well”, retorted Gideon, “when Yahweh has put Zebah and Zalmunna into my power, I shall tear 
your flesh off with desert-thorn and thistles”. 

Jdg 8:8 From there he went up to Penuel and asked the men of Penuel the same thing; they replied as those of 
Succoth had done. 

Jdg 8:9 And to those of Penuel he made a similar retort, “When I return victorious, I shall destroy this tower”. 

Jdg 8:10 Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with their army, about fifteen thousand men, all that was left of 
the entire army of the sons of the East. Of men bearing arms, a hundred and twenty thousand had fallen. 

Jdg 8:1 1 Gideon approached them by the tent-dwellers’ route, east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and attacked the 
army when it thought itself in safety. 

Jdg 8:12 Zebah and Zalmunna fled. He pursued them; he took the two kings of Midian prisoner — Zebah and 
Zalmunna — and the whole army he routed in panic. 

Jdg 8:13 After the battle Gideon came back by the Ascent of Heres. 

Jdg 8:14 He caught a young man, one of the people of Succoth, and questioned him, and the latter wrote down 
the names of the headmen and elders of Succoth for him — seventy-seven men. 

Jdg 8:15 Gideon son of Joash then went to the people of Succoth and said, “Here you see Zebah and 
Zalmunna, about whom you taunted me and said, ‘Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna already in your grasp, 
that we should give bread to your exhausted troops?’”. 

Jdg 8:16 He then seized the elders of the town and, taking desert-thorn and thistles, tore the men of Succoth to 
pieces. 

Jdg 8:17 He destroyed the tower of Penuel and slaughtered the townsmen. 

Jdg 8:18 He then said to Zebah and Zalmunna, “The men you killed at Tabor — what were they like?”. They 
replied, “They looked like you. Every one of them carried himself like the son of a king”. 

Jdg 8:19 Gideon replied, “They were my brothers, the sons of my own mother; as Yahweh lives, if you had 
spared their lives I would not kill you”. 

Jdg 8:20 To Jether his eldest son he said, “Stand up and kill them!”. But the boy did not draw his sword; he dared 
not; he was still only a lad. 

Jdg 8:21 Zebah and Zalmunna then said, “Stand up yourself, and strike us down; for as a man is, so is his 
strength”. Then Gideon stood up and killed Zebah and Zalmunna; and he took the crescents from round their 
camels’ necks. 

Jdg 8:22 The men of Israel said to Gideon, “Rule over us, you, your son and your grandson, since you have 
rescued us from the power of Midian”. 

Jdg 8:23 But Gideon replied, “I will not rule you, neither will my son. Yahweh shall rule you”. 

Jdg 8:24 Gideon went on, however, “Let me make you one request. Each of you give me one ring out of his 
booty” —for the vanquished had had gold rings, being Ishmaelites. 

Jdg 8:25 “We shall give them gladly”, they replied. So he spread out his cloak, and on it each of them threw a 
ring from his booty. 

Jdg 8:26 The weight of the gold rings which he had asked for amounted to seventeen hundred shekels of gold, 
besides the crescents and the earrings and purple garments worn by the kings of Midian, and besides the collars 
round their camels’ necks. 

Jdg 8:27 From this Gideon made an ephod and set it up in his town, in Ophrah. All Israel, following his example, 
prostituted themselves to it, and it was a snare for Gideon and his family. 

Jdg 8:28 Thus Midian was humbled before the Israelites. He did not raise his head again, and the country had 
peace for forty years, as long as Gideon lived. 

Jdg 8:29 So Jerubbaal son of Joash went to live at home. 

Jdg 8:30 Gideon had seventy sons begotten by him, for he had many wives. 

Jdg 8:31 His concubine, who lived in Shechem, also bore him a son, to whom he gave the name Abimelech. 

Jdg 8:32 Gideon son of Joash died after a happy old age and was buried in the tomb of Joash his father, at 
Ophrah of Abiezer. 

Jdg 8:33 After Gideon’s death, the people of Israel again began to prostitute themselves to the Baals, taking 
Baal-Berith for their god. 



Jdg 8:34 The Israelites no longer remembered Yahweh their God, who had rescued them from all the enemies 
round them. 

Jdg 8:35 And to the family of Jerubbaal — Gideon — they showed no faithful gratitude for all the good which it 
had done for Israel. 

Jdg 9:1 Abimelech son of Jerubbaal confronted his mother’s brothers at Shechem and, to them and to the whole 
clan of his maternal grandfather’s family, he said, 

Jdg 9:2 “Please put this question to the leading men of Shechem: Which is better for you: to be ruled by seventy 
people — all Jerubbaal’s sons — or to be ruled by one? Remember too that I am your own flesh and bone”. 

Jdg 9:3 His mother’s brothers said all this on his behalf to all the leading men of Shechem, and their feelings 
swayed them to follow Abimelech, since they argued, “He is our brother”. 

Jdg 9:4 So they gave him seventy shekels of silver from the temple of Baal-Berith, and with this Abimelech paid 
violent adventurers to follow him. 

Jdg 9:5 He then went to his father’s house at Ophrah and put his brothers, Jerubbaal’s seventy sons, to death 
on one and the same stone. Jotham, however, Jerubbaal’s youngest son, escaped by going into hiding. 

Jdg 9:6 All the leading men of Shechem and all Beth-Millo then met and proclaimed Abimelech king at the oak 
of the cultic stone at Shechem. 

Jdg 9:7 News of this was brought to Jotham. He went and stood on the top of Mount Gerizim and shouted at the 
top of his voice: Hear me, leaders of Shechem, so that God may also hear you! 

Jdg 9:8 One day the trees went out to anoint a king to rule them. They said to the olive tree, “Be our king!”. 

Jdg 9:9 The olive tree replied, “Must I forgo my oil which gives honour to gods and men, to stand and sway over 
the trees?’ 

Jdg 9:10 Then the trees said to the fig tree, “You come and be our king!”. 

Jdg 9:1 1 The fig tree replied, “Must I forgo my sweetness, forgo my excellent fruit, to go and sway over the 
trees?”. 

Jdg 9:12 Then the trees said to the vine, “You come and be our king!”. 

Jdg 9:13 The vine replied, “Must I forgo my wine which cheers gods and men, to go and sway over the trees?”. 
Jdg 9:14 Then the trees all said to the thorn bush, “You come and be our king!”. 

Jdg 9:15 And the thorn bush replied to the trees, “If you are anointing me in good faith to be your king, come and 
shelter in my shade. But, if not, fire will come out of the thorn bush and devour the cedars of Lebanon”. 

Jdg 9:16 “Now then, if you have acted in sincerity and good faith in making Abimelech king, if you have dealt 
honourably with Jerubbaal and his family, and have treated him as his actions deserved, 

Jdg 9:17 my father having fought for you, risked his life and rescued you from the power of Midian, 

Jdg 9:18 and you today having risen up against my father’s family, murdered his sons — seventy of them on one 
and the same stone — and appointed Abimelech, his slave-girl’s son, to rule the leading men of Shechem, 
because he is your brother!- 

Jdg 9:19 if, I say, you have acted in sincerity and good faith towards Jerubbaal and his family, then may 
Abimelech be your joy and may you be his! 

Jdg 9:20 If not, may fire come out of Abimelech and devour the leading men of Shechem and Beth-Millo, and 
fire come out of the leading men of Shechem and Beth-Millo to devour Abimelech!”. 

Jdg 9:21 Jotham then took to his heels; he fled and made his way to Beer; and there he stayed, to be out of his 
brother Abimelech’s reach. 

Jdg 9:22 Abimelech ruled Israel for three years. 

Jdg 9:23 God then sent a spirit of discord between Abimelech and the leaders of Shechem, and the leaders of 
Shechem betrayed Abimelech. 

Jdg 9:24 And this was so that the crime committed against Jerubbaal’s seventy sons should be avenged, and 
their blood recoil on their brother Abimelech who had murdered them, and on those leaders of Shechem who 
had helped him to murder his brothers. 

Jdg 9:25 The leaders of Shechem put men to ambush him on the mountain tops, and these robbed anyone 
travelling their way. Abimelech was told of this. 

Jdg 9:26 Gaal son of Obed, with his brothers, happened to pass through Shechem and win the confidence of 
the leaders of Shechem. 

Jdg 9:27 These went out into the countryside to harvest their vineyards; they trod the grapes and made merry 
and went into the temple of their god. They ate and drank there and cursed Abimelech. 

Jdg 9:28 Gaal son of Obed said, “Who is Abimelech, and what is Shechem, for us to be his slaves? Should not 
Jerubbaal’s son and his lieutenant, Zebul, be serving the men of Hamor, father of Shechem? Why should we be 
his slaves? 

Jdg 9:29 Who will put this people under my command, so that I can expel Abimelech? I should say to him, 
‘Reinforce your army and come out!’”. 

Jdg 9:30 Zebul the governor of the town was told what Gaal son of Obed had said, and he was furious. 



Jdg 9:31 He sent messengers secretly to Abimelech to say, “Look! Gaal son of Obed has come to Shechem 
with his brothers, and they are stirring up the town against you. 

Jdg 9:32 So, move under cover of dark, you and the men you have with you, and take up concealed positions in 
the countryside; 

Jdg 9:33 then in the morning at sunrise, break cover and rush on the town. When Gaal and his supporters come 
out to meet you, treat them as occasion offers”. 

Jdg 9:34 So Abimelech set off under cover of dark with all his own supporters and took up concealed positions 
over against Shechem, in four groups. 

Jdg 9:35 As Gaal son of Obed was coming out and pausing at the entrance of the town gate, Abimelech and his 
supporters rose from their ambush. 

Jdg 9:36 Gaal saw these men and said to Zebul, “Look, there are men coming down from the tops of the 
mountains!”. Zebul answered, “You mistake the shadow of the mountains for men”. 

Jdg 9:37 But Gaal insisted, “Look, there are men coming down from the Navel of the Earth and another group is 
coming from the direction of the Diviners’ Oak”. 

Jdg 9:38 Zebul then said, “Where are your mouthings now about ‘Who is Abimelech, for us to be his slaves?’. 
Are not these the men you made light of? Sally out, then, and fight him”. 

Jdg 9:39 Gaal sallied out at the head of the leaders of Shechem and engaged Abimelech. 

Jdg 9:40 Abimelech drove Gaal off, who turned tail, many of his men falling dead before they could reach the 
gate. 

Jdg 9:41 Abimelech then stayed at Aruma, and Zebul expelled Gaal and his brothers and prevented them from 
living in Shechem. 

Jdg 9:42 Next day, when the people went out into the countryside, Abimelech was told of this. 

Jdg 9:43 He took his men, divided them into three groups and lay in wait in the fields. When he saw the people 
leaving the town, he bore down on them and slaughtered them. 

Jdg 9:44 While Abimelech and his group rushed forward and took position at the entrance to the town gate, the 
two other groups fell on everyone in the fields and slaughtered them. 

Jdg 9:45 All that day Abimelech attacked the town. He stormed it and slaughtered the people inside, razed the 
town and sowed it with salt. 

Jdg 9:46 On hearing this, all the leading men inside Migdal-Shechem took refuge in the crypt of the temple of 
El-Berith. 

Jdg 9:47 As soon as Abimelech heard that the leading men inside Migdal-Shechem had all gathered there, 

Jdg 9:48 he went up Mount Zalmon with all his men. Then taking an axe in his hands, he cut off the branch of a 
tree, picked it up and put it on his shoulder, and said to the men with him, “Hurry and do what you have seen me 
do”. 

Jdg 9:49 Each of his men similarly cut off a branch; then, following Abimelech, they piled the branches over the 
crypt and set it on fire over those who were inside; so that all the people in Migdal-Shechem died too, about a 
thousand men and women. 

Jdg 9:50 Abimelech then marched on Thebez, besieged it and captured it. 

Jdg 9:51 In the middle of the town there was a fortified tower in which all the men and women and all the 
leading men of the town took refuge. They locked the door behind them and climbed up to the roof of the tower. 
Jdg 9:52 Abimelech reached the tower and attacked it. As he was approaching the door of the tower to set it on 
fire, 

Jdg 9:53 a woman threw down a millstone on his head and cracked his skull. 

Jdg 9:54 He instantly called his young armour-bearer and said, “Draw your sword and kill me, so that it will not 
be said of me that ‘A woman killed him’”. His armour-bearer ran him through, and he died. 

Jdg 9:55 When the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they dispersed to their homes. 

Jdg 9:56 Thus God made to recoil on Abimelech the evil he had done his father by murdering his seventy 
brothers, 

Jdg 9:57 and all the evil that the men of Shechem had done God made recoil on their heads too. And so the 
curse of Jotham son of Jerubbaal came true for them. 

Jdg 10:1 After Abimelech, Tola son of Puah, son of Dodo, rose to deliver Israel. He belonged to Issachar and 
lived at Shamir in the mountain country of Ephraim. 

Jdg 1 0:2 He was judge in Israel for twenty-three years; he then died and was buried at Shamir. 

Jdg 10:3 After him rose Jair of Gilead, who judged Israel for twenty-two years. 

Jdg 10:4 He had thirty sons who rode on thirty young donkeys and who owned thirty towns, still known today as 
the Encampments of Jair, in the territory of Gilead. 

Jdg 10:5 Jair then died and was buried at Kamon. 

Jdg 10:6 The Israelites again began doing what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes. They served Baal and Astarte, and the 
gods of Aram and Sidon, the gods of Moab and those of the Ammonites and Philistines. They deserted Yahweh 



and served him no more. 

Jdg 10:7 Yahweh’s anger then grew hot against Israel and he gave them over into the power of the Philistines 
and the power of the Ammonites, 

Jdg 10:8 who from that year onwards crushed and oppressed the Israelites for eighteen years — all those 
Israelites living on the other side of the Jordan in Amorite territory, in Gilead. 

Jdg 10:9 Furthermore, the Ammonites would cross the Jordan and also make war on Judah, Benjamin and the 
House of Ephraim, so that Israel was in distress. 

Jdg 10:10 The Israelites then cried to Yahweh and said, “We have sinned against you, because we have turned 
from Yahweh our God to serve Baals”. 

Jdg 10:1 1 And Yahweh said to the Israelites, “When Egyptians and Amorites, Ammonites and Philistines, 

Jdg 10:12 when the Sidonians, Amalek and Midian oppressed you and you cried to me, did I not rescue you 
from their power? 

Jdg 10:13 But it is you who have forsaken me and served other gods; and so I shall rescue you no more. 

Jdg 10:14 Go and cry to the gods whom you have chosen. Let them rescue you in your time of trouble”. 

Jdg 10:15 The Israelites replied to Yahweh, “We have sinned. Treat us as you see fit, but please rescue us 
today”. 

Jdg 10:16 They got rid of their foreign gods and served Yahweh, who could bear Israel’s suffering no longer. 

Jdg 10:17 The Ammonites gathered and pitched camp in Gilead. The Israelites rallied and pitched camp at 
Mizpah. 

Jdg 10:18 The people, the chieftains of Gilead, then said to one another, “Who will volunteer to attack the 
Ammonites? He shall be chief of all who live in Gilead!”. 

Jdg 11:1 Jephthah the Gileadite was a valiant warrior. He was a prostitute’s son. Gilead was Jephthah’s father, 
Jdg 1 1 :2 but Gilead’s wife also bore him sons, and the sons of this wife, when they grew up, drove Jephthah 
away, saying, “No share of the paternal heritage for you, since you are a son of another woman”. 

Jdg 11:3 Jephthah fled far from his brothers and settled in the territory of Tob. Jephthah enlisted a group of 
adventurers who used to go raiding with him. 

Jdg 11:4 It was some time after this that the Ammonites made war on Israel. 

Jdg 1 1:5 And when the Ammonites had attacked Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah from the 
territory of Tob. 

Jdg 1 1 :6 “Come”, they said, “and be our commander, so that we can fight the Ammonites”. 

Jdg 1 1 :7 Jephthah replied to the elders of Gilead, “Didn’t you hate me and drive me out of my father’s house? 
Why come to me now, when you are in trouble?”. 

Jdg 1 1 :8 The elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “That is why we are turning to you now. Come with us; fight the 
Ammonites and be our chief, chief of all the people living in Gilead”. 

Jdg 1 1 :9 Jephthah then said to the elders of Gilead, “If you bring me home to fight the Ammonites and Yahweh 
defeats them for me, I am to be your chief?”. 

Jdg 11:10 And the elders of Gilead then said to Jephthah, “Yahweh be witness between us, if we do not do as 
you have said!”. 

Jdg 11:11 So Jephthah set off with the elders of Gilead. The people put him at their head as chief and 
commander; and Jephthah repeated all his conditions at Mizpah in Yahweh’s presence. 

Jdg 11:12 Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the Ammonites to say to him, “What do you have against us, 
for you to come and make war on my country?”. 

Jdg 11:13 The king of the Ammonites replied to Jephthah’s messengers, “The reason is that when Israel came 
up from Egypt, they seized my country from the Arnon to the Jabbok and to the Jordan; so now restore it to me 
peacefully”. 

Jdg 11:14 Jephthah sent messengers back to the king of the Ammonites 

Jdg 11:15 with this answer, “Jephthah says this, ‘Israel seized neither the country of Moab nor the country of the 
Ammonites. 

Jdg 11:16 When Israel came out of Egypt, they marched through the desert as far as the Sea of Reeds and, 
having reached Kadesh, 

Jdg 11:17 Israel then sent messengers to the king of Edom to say: Please let me pass through your country, but 
the king of Edom would not listen. They sent similarly to the king of Moab, but he refused, and Israel remained at 
Kadesh; 

Jdg 11:18 later, moving on through the desert and skirting the countries of Edom and Moab until arriving to the 
east of Moabite territory, the people camped on the other side of the Arnon but did not enter Moabite territory, 
the Arnon being the Moabite frontier. 

Jdg 11:19 Israel then sent messengers to Sihon, king of the Amorites, ruling in Heshbon. Israel’s message was: 
Please let me pass through your country to my destination. 

Jdg 1 1:20 But Sihon would not let Israel pass through his territory; he mustered his whole army; they encamped 



at Jahaz, and he then joined battle with Israel. 

Jdg 1 1 :21 Yahweh, God of Israel, delivered Sihon and his whole army into the power of Israel, who defeated 
them; as the result of which, Israel took possession of the entire territory of the Amorites living in that region. 

Jdg 1 1 :22 Israel took possession of all the Amorite territory from the Arnon to the Jabbok and from the desert to 
the Jordan. 

Jdg 1 1:23 And now that Yahweh, God of Israel, has dispossessed the Amorites before his people Israel, do you 
think you can dispossess us? 

Jdg 1 1 :24 Will you not keep as your possession whatever Chemosh, your god, has given you? And, just the 
same, we shall keep as ours whatever Yahweh our God has given us, to inherit from those who were before us! 
Jdg 1 1 :25 Are you a better man than Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he pick a quarrel with Israel? Did 
he make war on them? 

Jdg 1 1:26 When Israel settled in Heshbon and its dependencies, and in Aroer and its dependencies, or in any of 
the towns on the banks of the Arnon (three hundred years ago), why did you not recover them then? 

Jdg 1 1 :27 I for my part have done you no harm, but you are wronging me by making war on me. Let Yahweh 
the Judge give judgement today between the Israelites and the king of the Ammonites’”. 

Jdg 1 1 :28 But the king of the Ammonites took no notice of the message that Jephthah sent him. 

Jdg 1 1:29 The spirit of Yahweh was on Jephthah, who crossed Gilead and Manasseh, crossed by way of 
Mizpah in Gilead, and from Mizpah in Gilead crossed into Ammonite territory. 

Jdg 1 1 :30 And Jephthah made a vow to Yahweh, “If you deliver the Ammonites into my grasp, 

Jdg 1 1 :31 the first thing to come out of the doors of my house to meet me when I return in triumph from fighting 
the Ammonites shall belong to Yahweh, and I shall sacrifice it as a burnt offering”. 

Jdg 1 1:32 Jephthah crossed into Ammonite territory to attack them, and Yahweh delivered them into his grasp. 
Jdg 1 1 :33 He beat them from Aroer to the border of Minnith (twenty towns) and to Abel-Keramim. It was a very 
severe defeat, and the Ammonites were humbled by the Israelites. 

Jdg 1 1:34 As Jephthah returned to his house at Mizpah, his daughter came out to meet him, dancing to the 
sound of tambourines. She was his only child; apart from her, he had neither son nor daughter. 

Jdg 1 1:35 When he saw her, he tore his clothes and exclaimed, “Oh my daughter, what misery you have 
brought upon me! You have joined those who bring misery into my life! I have made a promise before Yahweh 
which I cannot retract”. 

Jdg 1 1:36 She replied, “Father, you have made a promise to Yahweh; treat me as the promise that you have 
made requires, since Yahweh has granted you vengeance on your enemies the Ammonites”. 

Jdg 1 1 :37 She then said to her father, “Grant me this! Let me be free for two months. I shall go and wander in 
the mountains, and with my companions bewail my virginity”. 

Jdg 1 1 :38 He replied, “Go”, and let her go away for two months. So she went away with her companions and 
bewailed her virginity in the mountains. 

Jdg 1 1 :39 When the two months were over she went back to her father, and he treated her as the vow that he 
had uttered bound him. She had remained a virgin. And hence, the custom in Israel 

Jdg 1 1 :40 for the daughters of Israel to leave home year by year and lament over the daughter of Jephthah the 
Gileadite for four days every year. 

Jdg 12:1 The men of Ephraim mobilised; they crossed the Jordan nearZaphon and said to Jephthah, “Why did 
you go and make war on the Ammonites without asking us to go with you? We shall burn down your house over 
your head!”. 

Jdg 12:2 Jephthah replied, “My people and I were in serious conflict with the Ammonites. I summoned you, but 
you did not come to rescue me from them. 

Jdg 12:3 When I saw that no one was coming to rescue me, I took my life in my hands and marched against the 
Ammonites, and Yahweh handed them over to me. So why advance on me today to make war on me?”. 

Jdg 1 2:4 Jephthah then mustered all the men of Gilead and made war on Ephraim, and the men of Gilead 
defeated Ephraim — since the latter used to say, “You are only fugitives from Ephraim, you Gileadites in the heart 
of Ephraim and Manasseh”. 

Jdg 12:5 Gilead then cut Ephraim off from the fords of the Jordan, and whenever Ephraimite fugitives said, “Let 
me cross”, the men of Gilead would ask, “Are you an Ephraimite?”. If he said, “No”, 

Jdg 12:6 they then said, “Very well, say Shibboleth”. If anyone said, ‘Sibboleth’, because he could not 
pronounce it, then they would seize him and kill him by the fords of the Jordan. Forty-two thousand Ephraimites 
fell on this occasion. 

Jdg 1 2:7 Jephthah judged Israel for six years. Jephthah the Gileadite then died and was buried in his town, in 
Gilead. 

Jdg 1 2:8 After him, Ibzan of Bethlehem was judge in Israel. 

Jdg 12:9 He had thirty sons and thirty daughters. He gave his daughters in marriage outside his clan and 
brought in thirty brides from outside for his sons. He was judge in Israel for seven years. 



Jdg 12:10 Ibzan then died and was buried in Bethlehem. 

Jdg 12:1 1 After him, Elon of Zebulun was judge in Israel. He was judge in Israel for ten years. 

Jdg 12:12 Elon of Zebulun then died and was buried at Aijalon in the territory of Zebulun. 

Jdg 12:13 After him, Abdon son of Hillel of Pirathon was judge in Israel. 

Jdg 12:14 He had forty sons and thirty grandsons who rode seventy young donkeys. He was judge in Israel for 
eight years. 

Jdg 12:15 Abdon son of Hillel of Pirathon then died and was buried at Pirathon in the territory of Ephraim, in the 
Amalekite highlands. 

Jdg 13:1 Again the Israelites began doing what is evil in Yahweh’s eyes, and Yahweh delivered them into the 
power of the Philistines for forty years. 

Jdg 1 3:2 There was a man of Zorah of the tribe of Dan, called Manoah. His wife was barren; she had borne no 
children. 

Jdg 13:3 The Angel of Yahweh appeared to this woman and said to her, “You are barren and have had no child, 
but you are going to conceive and give birth to a son. 

Jdg 13:4 From now on, take great care. Drink no wine or fermented liquor, and eat nothing unclean. 

Jdg 1 3:5 For you are going to conceive and give birth to a son. No razor is to touch his head, for the boy is to be 
God’s nazirite from his mother’s womb; and he will start rescuing Israel from the power of the Philistines”. 

Jdg 1 3:6 The woman then went and told her husband, “A man of God has just come to me, who looked like the 
Angel of God, so majestic was he. I did not ask him where he came from, and he did not tell me his name. 

Jdg 13:7 But he said to me, ‘You are going to conceive and will give birth to a son. From now on, drink no wine 
or fermented liquor, and eat nothing unclean. For the boy is to be God’s nazirite from his mother’s womb to his 
dying day’”. 

Jdg 13:8 Manoah then pleaded with Yahweh and said, “I beg you, Lord, let the man of God that you sent come 
to us again and instruct us what to do about the child when he is born”. 

Jdg 13:9 Yahweh heard Manoah’s prayer, and the Angel of Yahweh visited the woman again while she was 
sitting in a field and when her husband Manoah was not with her. 

Jdg 13:10 The woman quickly ran and told her husband, “Look”, she said, “the man who came to me the other 
day has appeared to me again”. 

Jdg 13:1 1 Manoah got up, followed his wife, came to the man and said to him, “Are you the man who spoke to 
this woman?”. He replied, “I am”. 

Jdg 13:12 Manoah then said, “When your words come true, what will be the boy’s way of life?”. 

Jdg 13:13 The Angel of Yahweh replied to Manoah, “From everything that I forbade this woman, let her abstain. 
Jdg 13:14 Let her swallow nothing that comes from the vine, let her drink no wine or fermented liquor, let her eat 
nothing unclean and let her obey all the orders that I have given her”. 

Jdg 13:15 Manoah then said to the Angel of Yahweh, “Allow us to detain you while we prepare a kid for you” — 
for Manoah did not know that this was the Angel of Yahweh. 

Jdg 13:16 The Angel of Yahweh said to Manoah, “Even if you did detain me, I should not eat your food; but if 
you wish to prepare a burnt offering, offer it to Yahweh”. 

Jdg 13:17 Manoah then said to the Angel of Yahweh, “What is your name, so that we may honour you when 
your words come true?”. 

Jdg 13:18 The Angel of Yahweh replied, “Why ask my name? It is a name of wonder”. 

Jdg 13:19 Manoah then took the kid and the oblation and offered it on the rock as a burnt offering to Yahweh 
the Wonderworker. Manoah and his wife looked on. 

Jdg 13:20 Now, as the flame rose heavenwards from the altar, the Angel of Yahweh ascended in this flame 
before the eyes of Manoah and his wife, and they fell face downwards on the ground. 

Jdg 1 3:21 After this, the Angel of Yahweh did not appear any more to Manoah and his wife, but Manoah 
understood that this had been the Angel of Yahweh. 

Jdg 13:22 And Manoah said to his wife, “We are certain to die, because we have seen God”. 

Jdg 1 3:23 His wife replied, “If Yahweh had meant to kill us, he would not have accepted a burnt offering and 
oblation from us, he would not have let us see all this and, at the same time, have told us such things”. 

Jdg 13:24 The woman gave birth to a son and called him Samson. The child grew, and Yahweh blessed him; 
Jdg 13:25 and the spirit of Yahweh began to stir him in the Camp of Dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol. 

Jdg 14:1 Samson went down to Timnah, and at Timnah he noticed a woman, a Philistine girl. 

Jdg 14:2 He went home again and told his father and mother this. “At Timnah”, he said, “I noticed a woman, a 
Philistine girl. So now get her for me, to be my wife”. 

Jdg 14:3 His father and mother said to him, “Is there no woman among your brothers’ daughters or in our entire 
nation, for you to go and take a wife among these uncircumcised Philistines?”. But Samson said to his father, “Get 
that one for me; she is the one I am fond of”. 

Jdg 14:4 His father and mother did not know that all this came from Yahweh, who was seeking grounds for a 



quarrel with the Philistines, since at this time the Philistines dominated Israel. 

Jdg 14:5 Samson went down to Timnah and, as he reached the vineyards of Timnah, he saw a young lion 
coming roaring towards him. 

Jdg 14:6 The spirit of Yahweh seized on him and he tore the lion to pieces with his bare hands as though it were 
a kid; but he did not tell his father or mother what he had done. 

Jdg 14:7 He went down and talked to the woman, and he became fond of her. 

Jdg 14:8 Not long after this, Samson went back to marry her. He went out of his way to look at the carcase of 
the lion, and there was a swarm of bees in the lion’s body, and honey. 

Jdg 14:9 He took up some honey in his hand and ate it as he went along. On returning to his father and mother, 
he gave some to them, which they ate too, but he did not tell them that he had taken it from the lion’s carcase. 
Jdg 14:10 His father then went down to the woman, and Samson made a feast there, as is the custom for young 
men. 

Jdg 14:1 1 And when the Philistines saw him, they chose thirty companions to stay with him. 

Jdg 14:12 Samson then said to them, “Let me ask you a riddle. If you can give me the answer during the seven 
days of feasting, I shall give you thirty pieces of fine linen and thirty festal robes. 

Jdg 14:13 But if you cannot tell me the answer, then you in your turn must give me thirty pieces of fine linen and 
thirty festal robes”. “Ask your riddle”, they replied, “we are listening”. 

Jdg 14:14 So he said to them: Out of the eater came what is eaten, and out of the strong came what is sweet. 
But three days went by and they could not solve the riddle. 

Jdg 14:15 On the fourth day they said to Samson’s wife, “Cajole your husband into explaining the riddle to us, or 
we shall burn you and your father’s family to death. Did you invite us here to rob us?”. 

Jdg 14:16 Samson’s wife then went to him in tears and said, “You only hate me, you do not love me. You have 
asked my fellow countrymen a riddle and told not even me the answer”. He said to her, “I have not told even my 
father or mother; why should I tell you?”. 

Jdg 14:17 She wept on his neck for the seven days that their feasting lasted. She was so persistent that on the 
seventh day he told her the answer, and she told her fellow-countrymen. 

Jdg 14:18 So on the seventh day, before he went into the bedroom, the men of the town said to him: What is 
sweeter than honey, and what stronger than a lion? He retorted: If you had not ploughed with my heifer, you 
would never have solved my riddle. 

Jdg 14:19 Then the spirit of Yahweh seized on him. He went down to Ashkelon, killed thirty men there, took 
what they wore and gave the festal robes to those who had answered the riddle, then burning with rage returned 
to his father’s house. 

Jdg 14:20 Samson’s wife was then given to the companion who had acted as his best man. 

Jdg 15:1 Not long after this, at the time of the wheat harvest, Samson visited his wife, with a kid; he said, “I wish 
to go to my wife in her room”. But her father would not let him enter. 

Jdg 1 5:2 “I felt sure”, he said, “that you had taken a real dislike to her, so I gave her to your companion. But 
would not her younger sister suit you better? Have her instead”. 

Jdg 15:3 But Samson answered them, “I can get my revenge on the Philistines now only by doing them some 
damage”. 

Jdg 15:4 So Samson went off and caught three hundred foxes, then took torches and, turning the foxes tail to 
tail, put a torch between each pair of tails. 

Jdg 15:5 He lit the torches and set the foxes free in the Philistines’ cornfields. In this way he burned both 
sheaves and standing corn, and the vines and olive trees as well. 

Jdg 15:6 The Philistines asked, “Who has done this?”. and received the answer, “Samson, who married the 
Timnite’s daughter; his father-in-law took the wife back again and gave her to his companion instead”. The 
Philistines then went and burned the woman and her father’s family to death. 

Jdg 1 5:7 Samson said to them, “If that is how you behave, I swear I will not rest till I have had my revenge on 
you”. 

Jdg 15:8 And he fell on them systematically and caused great havoc. Then he went down to the cave in the 
Rock of Etham and lived there. 

Jdg 15:9 The Philistines came up and encamped in Judah and made a foray against Lehi. 

Jdg 15:10 The men of Judah said to them, “Why are you attacking us?”. They replied, “We have come to seize 
Samson and to treat him as he has treated us”. 

Jdg 15:1 1 Three thousand men of Judah then went down to the cave of the Rock of Etham and said to him, 
“Don’t you know that the Philistines have us in their power? Now what have you done to us?”. He replied, “I have 
treated them only as they treated me”. 

Jdg 15:12 They then said, “We have come down to take you, to hand you over to the Philistines”. He said, 

“Swear to me not to kill me yourselves”. 

Jdg 15:13 They replied, “No; we only want to bind you and hand you over to them; we certainly do not want to 



kill you”. They then bound him with two new ropes and brought him up from the Rock. 

Jdg 15:14 As he was approaching Lehi, and the Philistines came running towards him with triumphant shouts, 
the spirit of Yahweh was on him; the ropes on his arms became like burnt strands of flax and the cords round his 
hands came untied. 

Jdg 15:15 Coming across the fresh jawbone of a donkey, he reached out and snatched it up; and with it he 
slaughtered a thousand men. 

Jdg 15:16 And Samson said: With the jawbone of a donkey I have laid them in heaps, with the jawbone of a 
donkey I have felled a thousand men. 

Jdg 15:17 And with that he hurled the jawbone away; and that is why the place was called Ramath-Lehi. 

Jdg 15:18 And as he was very thirsty, he called on Yahweh and said, “You yourself have worked this great 
deliverance by the hand of your servant; and now must I die of thirst and fall into the hands of the 
uncircumcised?”. 

Jdg 15:19 Then God opened a hollow in the ground, the hollow there is at Lehi, and water gushed out of it. 
Samson drank; his vigour returned and he revived. And therefore this spring was called En-ha-Kore; it is still at 
Lehi today. 

Jdg 1 5:20 Samson was judge in Israel in the days of the Philistines for twenty years. 

Jdg 16:1 Samson then went to Gaza and, seeing a prostitute there, went in to her. 

Jdg 16:2 The men of Gaza being told, “Samson has arrived”, surrounded the place and kept watch for him the 
whole night at the town gate. All that night they were going to make no move, thinking, “Let us wait until 
daybreak, and then kill him”. 

Jdg 16:3 Till midnight, however, Samson stayed in bed, and then at midnight he got up, seized the doors of the 
town gate and the two posts as well; he tore them up, bar and all, hoisted them on to his shoulders and carried 
them to the top of the hill overlooking Hebron. 

Jdg 1 6:4 After this, he fell in love with a woman in the Vale of Sorek; she was called Delilah. 

Jdg 1 6:5 The Philistine chiefs visited her and said, “Cajole him and find out where his great strength comes 
from, and how we can master him, so that we can bind him and subdue him. In return we shall each give you 
eleven hundred silver shekels”. 

Jdg 16:6 Delilah said to Samson, “Please tell me where your great strength comes from, and what would be 
needed to bind and subdue you”. 

Jdg 16:7 Samson replied, “If I were bound with seven new bowstrings which had not yet been dried, I should 
lose my strength and become like any other man”. 

Jdg 16:8 The Philistine chiefs brought Delilah seven new bowstrings which had not yet been dried and she took 
them and bound him with them. 

Jdg 16:9 She had men concealed in her room, and she shouted, “The Philistines are on you, Samson!”. Then he 
snapped the bowstrings as a strand of tow snaps at a touch of the fire. So the secret of his strength remained 
unknown. 

Jdg 16:10 Delilah then said to Samson, “You have been laughing at me and telling me lies. But now please tell 
me what would be needed to bind you”. 

Jdg 16:1 1 He replied, “If I were bound tightly with new ropes which have never been used, I should lose my 
strength and become like any other man”. 

Jdg 16:12 Delilah then took new ropes and bound him with them, and she shouted, “The Philistines are on you, 
Samson!”. She had men concealed in her room, but he snapped the ropes round his arms like thread. 

Jdg 16:13 Delilah then said to Samson, “Up to now you have been laughing at me and telling me lies. Tell me 
what would be needed to bind you”. He replied, “If you wove the seven locks of my hair into the warp of a cloth 
and beat them together tight with the reed, I should lose my strength and become like any other man”. 

Jdg 16:14 She lulled him to sleep, then wove the seven locks of his hair into the warp, beat them together tight 
with the reed and shouted, “The Philistines are on you, Samson!”. He woke from his sleep and pulled out both 
reed and warp. So the secret of his strength remained unknown. 

Jdg 16:15 Delilah said to him, “How can you say that you love me, when your heart is not with me? Three times 
now you have laughed at me and have not told me where your great strength comes from”. 

Jdg 16:16 And day after day she pestered him with her talk, nagging him till he grew sick to death of it. 

Jdg 16:17 At last he confided everything to her; he said to her, “A razor has never touched my head, because I 
have been God’s nazirite from my mother’s womb. If my head were shorn, then my power would leave me and I 
should lose my strength and become like any other man”. 

Jdg 16:18 Delilah then realized that he had really confided in her; she sent for the Philistine princes with the 
message, “Come just once more: he has confided everything to me”. And the Philistine chiefs came to her with 
the money in their hands. 

Jdg 16:19 She lulled Samson to sleep in her lap, summoned a man and had him shear off the seven locks from 
his head. Thus for the first time she got control over him, and his strength left him. 



Jdg 16:20 She cried, “The Philistines are on you, Samson!”. He awoke from sleep, thinking, “I shall break free as I 
have done time after time and shake myself clear”. But he did not know that Yahweh had left him. 

Jdg 16:21 The Philistines seized him, put out his eyes and took him down to Gaza. They fettered him with a 
double chain of bronze and he spent his time turning the mill in the prison. 

Jdg 16:22 But his hair began to grow again when it had been cut off. 

Jdg 16:23 The Philistine chiefs assembled to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon their god. And amid their festivities 
they said: Into our hands our god has delivered Samson our enemy. 

Jdg 16:24 And as soon as the people saw their god, they acclaimed him, shouting his praises: Into our hands 
our god has delivered Samson our enemy, the man who laid our country waste and killed so many of us. 

Jdg 16:25 And as their hearts were full of joy, they shouted, “Summon Samson out to amuse us”. So Samson 
was summoned from prison, and he performed feats in front of them; then he was put to stand between the 
pillars. 

Jdg 16:26 Samson then said to the boy who was leading him by the hand, “Lead me where I can touch the 
pillars supporting the building, so that I can lean against them”. 

Jdg 16:27 Now the building was crowded with men and women. All the Philistine chiefs were there, while about 
three thousand men and women were watching Samson’s feats from the terrace. 

Jdg 16:28 Samson called on Yahweh and cried out, “Lord Yahweh, I beg you, remember me; give me strength 
again this once, O God, and let me be revenged on the Philistines at one blow for my two eyes”. 

Jdg 16:29 And Samson took hold of the two central pillars supporting the building, and braced himself with his 
right arm round one and his left round the other; 

Jdg 16:30 and he shouted, “Let me die with the Philistines!”. He then heaved with all his might, and the building 
fell on the chiefs and on all the people there. Those whom he brought to their death by his death outnumbered 
those whom he had done to death during his life. 

Jdg 16:31 His brothers and the whole of his father’s family came down and carried him away. They took him 
back and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the tomb of Manoah his father. He had judged Israel for 
twenty years. 

Jdg 17:1 In the highlands of Ephraim there was a man called Micayehu. 

Jdg 17:2 He said to his mother, “The eleven hundred silver shekels which were taken from you and concerning 
which you uttered a curse, having said in my hearing … Look, I have got that silver. I was the one who took it”. 
His mother said, “May Yahweh bless my boy!”. 

Jdg 17:3 He gave the eleven hundred shekels back to his mother, who said, “I have indeed vowed to give this 
silver to Yahweh for my son, to have a statue carved and an idol cast in metal, but now I should like to give it 
back to you”. He, however, returned the money to his mother. 

Jdg 17:4 His mother then took two hundred silver shekels and gave them to the metalworker. With them, he 
carved a statue (and cast an idol in metal) which was put in Micayehu’s house. 

Jdg 17:5 This man Micah owned a shrine; he made an ephod and some domestic images, and installed one of 
his sons to be his priest. 

Jdg 17:6 In those days there was no king in Israel, and everyone did as he saw fit. 

Jdg 17:7 There was a young man of Bethlehem in Judah, of the clan of Judah, who was a Levite and resided 
there as a stranger. 

Jdg 17:8 This man left the town of Bethlehem in Judah to settle wherever he could find a home. On his travels 
he came to the highlands of Ephraim and to Micah’s house. 

Jdg 17:9 Micah asked him, “Where do you come from?”. The other replied, “I am a Levite from Bethlehem in 
Judah. I am travelling, and am going to settle wherever I can find a home”. 

Jdg 17:10 Micah said to him, “Stay here with me; be my father and priest and I shall give you ten silver shekels 
a year, and clothing and food”. 

Jdg 17:1 1 The Levite agreed to remain in the man’s house, and the young man became like one of his sons to 
him. 

Jdg 17:12 Micah installed the Levite; the young man became Micah’s priest and stayed in his house. 

Jdg 17:13 And Micah said, “Now I know that Yahweh will treat me well, since I have this Levite as priest”. 

Jdg 18:1 In those days there was no king in Israel. Now in those days the tribe of Dan was in search of a 
territory to live in, for until then no territory had fallen to them among the tribes of Israel. 

Jdg 18:2 From their clan the Danites sent five brave men from Zorah and Eshtaol to reconnoitre the country and 
explore it. They said to them, “Go and explore the country”. The five men came to the highlands of Ephraim, as 
far as Micah’s house, and spent the night there. 

Jdg 18:3 When they were near Micah’s house, they recognised the voice of the young Levite and, going nearer, 
said to him, “Who brought you here? What are you doing here? What is keeping you here?”. 

Jdg 18:4 He replied, “Micah has made certain arrangements with me. He pays me a wage and I act as his 
priest”. 



Jdg 1 8:5 They replied, “Then consult God, so that we may know whether the journey we are on will lead to 
success”. 

Jdg 18:6 The priest replied, “Go in peace; Yahweh is watching over your journey”. 

Jdg 18:7 The five men then left and, arriving at Laish, saw that the people living there had an untroubled 
existence, according to the customs of the Sidonians, peaceful and trusting, that there was no lack or shortage 
of any sort in the territory, that they were a long way away from the Sidonians and that they had no contact with 
the Aramaeans. 

Jdg 18:8 They then went back to their brothers at Zorah and Eshtaol and, when the latter asked them, “What 
have you to report?”. 

Jdg 1 8:9 they said, “Up! we must go against them, since we have looked at the country and it is excellent, 
though you take no action! Waste no time in setting out and taking possession of the country. 

Jdg 18:10 When you get there, you will find a trusting people. The country is wide, and God has put it at your 
mercy. It is a place where there is no lack of anything on earth”. 

Jdg 18:1 1 From these places, consequently, from the clan of Danites at Zorah and Eshtaol, six hundred men set 
out equipped for war. 

Jdg 18:12 They went up and camped at Kiriath-Jearim in Judah; and for this reason the place is still called the 
Camp of Dan today. It lies to the west of Kiriath-Jearim. 

Jdg 18:13 From there they entered the highlands of Ephraim and came to Micah’s house. 

Jdg 18:14 The five men who had been to reconnoitre the country then spoke to their brothers. “Do you know”, 
they said, “that in these houses there is an ephod, some domestic images, a carved statue and an idol cast in 
metal? So now work out what you have got to do!”. 

Jdg 18:15 So, turning off the road, they went to the young Levite’s dwelling, to Micah’s house, and greeted him 
peacefully. 

Jdg 18:16 While the six hundred men of the Danites, equipped for war, stood at the threshold of the gate, 

Jdg 18:17 the five who had been to reconnoitre the country went on into the house and took the carved statue, 
the ephod, the domestic images and the idol cast in metal; meanwhile the priest remained at the threshold of the 
gate with the six hundred men equipped for war. 

Jdg 18:18 These men, having entered Micah’s house, took the carved statue, the ephod, the domestic images 
and the idol cast in metal. The priest, however, said, “What are you doing?”. 

Jdg 18:19 “Be quiet”, they replied. “Put your hand over your mouth and come with us, and become our father and 
priest. Are you better off as domestic priest to one man, or as priest to a tribe and clan in Israel?”. 

Jdg 18:20 The priest was delighted; he took the ephod, the domestic images and the carved statue, and went 
off among the people. 

Jdg 18:21 Resuming their original line of march, they set off, having put the women, children, livestock and 
baggage out in front. 

Jdg 18:22 They had gone some distance from Micah’s house, when the people living in the houses near Micah’s 
house raised the alarm and set off in pursuit of the Danites. 

Jdg 1 8:23 As they shouted after the Danites, the latter, turning about, said to Micah, “What is the matter with 
you, that you are shouting like this?”. 

Jdg 18:24 He replied, “You have taken away my god, which I have had made, and the priest as well. You are 
going away, and what have I got left? And now you ask me, ‘What is the matter?’”. 

Jdg 18:25 The Danites said, “Let us hear no more from you, or quick-tempered men may set about you, and this 
might cost you your life and the lives of your family!”. 

Jdg 1 8:26 So the Danites went on their way; and Micah, seeing that they were the stronger, turned and went 
home. 

Jdg 18:27 So, having taken the god made by Micah, and the priest who had been his, the Danites marched on 
Laish, on a peaceful and trusting people. They put it to the sword and they burned down the town. 

Jdg 18:28 There was no one to come to the rescue, since it was a long way from Sidon and had no contact with 
the Aramaeans. It lay in the valley running towards Beth-Rehob. They rebuilt the town and settled in it 
Jdg 18:29 and called it Dan, from the name of Dan their ancestor who had been born to Israel; originally, 
however, the town had been called Laish. 

Jdg 18:30 The Danites erected the carved statue for themselves. Jonathan son of Gershom, son of Moses, and 
his sons after him were priests for the tribe of Dan till the day when the inhabitants of the country were carried 
away into exile. 

Jdg 1 8:31 The carved statue made by Micah they installed for their own use, and there it stayed as long as the 
house of God remained at Shiloh. 

Jdg 19:1 In those days, when there was no king in Israel, there was a man, a Levite, whose home was deep in 
the highlands of Ephraim. He took as concubine a woman from Bethlehem in Judah. 

Jdg 1 9:2 In a fit of anger his concubine left him and went back to her father’s house at Bethlehem in Judah, and 



she stayed there for some time — four months. 

Jdg 19:3 Her husband then set out after her, to appeal to her affections and fetch her back; he had his servant 
and two donkeys with him. As he was arriving at the house of the girl’s father, the father saw him and came 
happily to meet him. 

Jdg 19:4 His father-in-law, the girl’s father, kept him there; and he stayed with him for three days; they ate and 
drank and spent the nights there. 

Jdg 19:5 On the fourth day they got up early, and the Levite was preparing to leave when the girl’s father said to 
his son-in-law, “Have something to eat to gather strength; you can leave later”. 

Jdg 1 9:6 So they sat down and began eating and drinking, the two of them together; then the girl’s father said to 
the young man, “Please agree to spend tonight here too and enjoy yourself”. 

Jdg 19:7 And when the man got up to leave, the father-in-law pressed him again, and he spent another night 
there. 

Jdg 1 9:8 On the fifth day, the Levite got up early to leave, but the girl’s father said to him, “Please gather 
strength first!”. So they stayed on until the sun began to go down, and the two men had a meal together. 

Jdg 19:9 The husband was getting up to leave with his concubine and his servant when his father-in-law, the 
girl’s father, said, “Look, day is fading into evening. Please spend the night here. Look, the day is nearly over. 
Spend the night here and enjoy yourself. Then, early tomorrow, you can leave on your journey and go back 
home”. 

Jdg 19:10 But the man, refusing to stay the night, got up and went on his way, until he arrived within sight of 
Jebus — that is, Jerusalem. He had with him two donkeys saddled, his concubine and his servant. 

Jdg 19:1 1 By the time they were near Jebus, the light was going fast. The servant said to his master, “Come on, 
please, let us turn off into this Jebusite town and spend the night there”. 

Jdg 19:12 His master replied, “We shall not turn off into a town of foreigners, of people who are not Israelites; 
we shall go on to Gibeah”. 

Jdg 19:13 He then said to his servant, “Come on, we shall try to reach one or other of those places, either 
Gibeah or Ramah, and spend the night there”. 

Jdg 19:14 So they kept going and went on with their journey. As they approached Gibeah in Benjamin, the sun 
was setting. 

Jdg 19:15 So they turned that way to spend the night in Gibeah. Once inside, the Levite sat down in the town 
square, but no one offered to take them in for the night. 

Jdg 19:16 Eventually, an old man came along at nightfall from his work in the fields. He too was from the 
highlands of Ephraim, although he was living in Gibeah; the people of the place, however, were Benjaminites. 

Jdg 19:17 Looking up, he saw the traveller in the town square. “Where are you going?”. said the old man, “And 
where have you come from?”. 

Jdg 19:18 “We are on our way”, the other replied, “from Bethlehem in Judah to a place deep in the highlands of 
Ephraim. That is where I come from. I have been to Bethlehem in Judah and now I am going home, but no one 
has offered to take me into his house, 

Jdg 19:19 although we have straw and provender for our donkeys, and I also have bread and wine for myself, 
and this maidservant and the young man who is travelling with your servant; we are short of nothing”. 

Jdg 19:20 “Welcome”, said the old man. “I shall see that you have all you want. You cannot spend the night in 
the square”. 

Jdg 1 9:21 So he took him into his house and gave the donkeys provender. The travellers washed their feet, 
then ate and drank. 

Jdg 19:22 While they were enjoying themselves, some townsmen, scoundrels, came crowding round the house; 
they battered on the door and said to the old man, master of the house, “Send out the man who went into your 
house, we should like to have intercourse with him!”. 

Jdg 19:23 The master of the house went out to them and said, “No, brothers, please, do not be so wicked. Since 
this man is now under my roof, do not commit such an infamy. 

Jdg 1 9:24 Here is my daughter; she is a virgin; I shall bring her out to you. Ill-treat her, do what you please with 
her, but do not commit such an infamy against this man”. 

Jdg 19:25 But the men would not listen to him. So the Levite took hold of his concubine and brought her out to 
them. They had intercourse with her and ill-treated her all night till morning; when dawn was breaking they let her 
go. 

Jdg 19:26 At daybreak the girl came and fell on the threshold of her husband’s host, and she stayed there until it 
was light. 

Jdg 1 9:27 In the morning her husband got up and, opening the door of the house, was going out to continue his 
journey when he saw the woman, his concubine, lying at the door of the house with her hands on the threshold. 
Jdg 19:28 “Get up”, he said, “we must leave!”. There was no answer. He then loaded her on his donkey and 
began the journey home. 



Jdg 19:29 Having reached his house, he took his knife, took hold of his concubine and cut her, limb by limb, into 
twelve pieces; he then sent her throughout the territory of Israel. 

Jdg 19:30 He gave instructions to his messengers, “This is what you are to say to all the Israelites, ‘Has 
anything like this been done since the day when the Israelites came out of Egypt until today? Take this to heart, 
discuss it; then give your verdict’”. And all who saw it declared, “Never has such a thing been done or been seen 
since the Israelites came out of Egypt until today”. 

Jdg 20:1 The Israelites then all turned out and, as one man, the entire community from Dan to Beersheba, 
including Gilead, assembled in Yahweh’s presence at Mizpah. 

Jdg 20:2 The leaders of the entire people, of all the tribes of Israel, were present at this assembly of God’s 
people, four hundred thousand trained infantry. 

Jdg 20:3 The Benjaminites heard that the Israelites had gone up to Mizpah. The Israelites then said, “Tell us 
how this crime was committed”. 

Jdg 20:4 The Levite, husband of the murdered woman, spoke in reply and said, 

Jdg 20:5 “The men of Gibeah ganged up against me and, during the night, surrounded the house where I was 
lodging. They intended to murder me. They raped my concubine to death. 

Jdg 20:6 I then took my concubine, cut her up and sent her throughout the entire territory of the heritage of 
Israel, since these men had committed a shameful act, an infamy, in Israel. 

Jdg 20:7 Now, all you Israelites, discuss the matter and give your decision here and now”. 

Jdg 20:8 The whole people stood up as one man and said, “None of us will go home, none of us will go back to 
his house! 

Jdg 20:9 And this is what we are now going to do to Gibeah. We shall draw lots 

Jdg 20:10 and, throughout the tribes of Israel, select ten men out of a hundred, a hundred out of a thousand and 
a thousand out of ten thousand to collect food for the people, so that, on their arrival, the latter may treat Gibeah 
in Benjamin as this infamy perpetrated in Israel deserves”. 

Jdg 20:1 1 Thus, as one man, all the men of Israel mustered against the town. 

Jdg 20:12 The tribes of Israel sent messengers throughout the tribe of Benjamin to say, “What is this crime 
which has been committed in your territory? 

Jdg 20:13 Now, give up these men, these scoundrels, living in Gibeah, so that we can put them to death and 
wipe out this evil from Israel”. The Benjaminites, however, would not listen to their brother Israelites. 

Jdg 20:14 The Benjaminites left their towns and mustered at Gibeah to fight the Israelites. 

Jdg 20:15 At the time, a count was made of the Benjaminites from the various towns: there were twenty-six 
thousand swordsmen; and the count excluded the inhabitants of Gibeah. 

Jdg 20:16 In this great army there were seven hundred first-rate left-handers, every man of whom could sling a 
stone at a hair and not miss it. 

Jdg 20:17 A count was also held of the men of Israel, excluding Benjamin: there were four hundred thousand 
men, all experienced swordsmen. 

Jdg 20:18 They moved off, up to Bethel, to consult God. The Israelites put the question, “Which of us is to go 
first into battle against the Benjaminites?”. And Yahweh replied, “Judah is to go first”. 

Jdg 20:19 In the morning, the Israelites moved off and pitched their camp over against Gibeah. 

Jdg 20:20 The men of Israel advanced to do battle with Benjamin; they drew up their battle line in front of 
Gibeah. 

Jdg 20:21 But the Benjaminites sallied out from Gibeah and that day massacred twenty-two thousand Israelites. 
Jdg 20:22 The army of the men of Israel then took fresh heart and again drew up their battle line in the same 
place as the day before. 

Jdg 20:23 The Israelites went and wept before Yahweh until evening; they then consulted Yahweh; they asked, 
“Shall we join battle again with the sons of our brother Benjamin?”. Yahweh replied, “March against him!”. 

Jdg 20:24 This second day, the Israelites advanced against the Benjaminites, 

Jdg 20:25 and, this second day, Benjamin sallied out from Gibeah to meet them and massacred another 
eighteen thousand Israelites, all experienced swordsmen. 

Jdg 20:26 Then all the Israelites and the whole people went off to Bethel; they wept and sat in Yahweh’s 
presence; they fasted all day till the evening and presented burnt offerings and communion sacrifices before 
Yahweh. 

Jdg 20:27 The Israelites then consulted Yahweh. In those days, the ark of the covenant of God was there, 

Jdg 20:28 and Phinehas son of Eleazer, son of Aaron was its minister at the time. They said, “Ought I to go into 
battle against the sons of my brother Benjamin again, or should I stop?”. Yahweh replied, “March! For tomorrow I 
shall deliver him into your hands”. 

Jdg 20:29 Israel then positioned troops in ambush all round Gibeah. 

Jdg 20:30 On the third day the Israelites marched against the Benjaminites and, as before, drew up their line in 
front of Gibeah. 



Jdg 20:31 The Benjaminites sallied out to engage the people and let themselves be drawn away from the town. 
As before, they began by killing those of the people who were on the roads, one of which runs up to Bethel, and 
the other to Gibeah through open country: some thirty men of Israel. 

Jdg 20:32 The Benjaminites thought, “We have beaten them, as we did the first time, 1 but the Israelites had 
decided, “We shall run away and draw them away from the town along the roads”. 

Jdg 20:33 All the Israelites then retreated and reformed at Baal-Tamar, while the Israelite troops in ambush 
surged from their positions to the west of Gibeah. 

Jdg 20:34 Ten thousand picked men, chosen from the whole of Israel, launched their attack on Gibeah. The 
battle was fierce; and the others knew nothing of the disaster impending. 

Jdg 20:35 Yahweh defeated Benjamin before Israel and that day the Israelites killed twenty-five thousand one 
hundred men of Benjamin, all of them trained swordsmen. 

Jdg 20:36 The Benjaminites saw that they were beaten. The Israelites had given ground to Benjamin, since they 
were relying on the ambush which they had positioned close to Gibeah. 

Jdg 20:37 The troops in ambush threw themselves against Gibeah at top speed; fanning out, they put the whole 
town to the sword. 

Jdg 20:38 Now it had been agreed between the Israelites and those of the ambush that the latter should raise a 
smoke signal from the town, 

Jdg 20:39 whereupon the Israelites in the thick of the battle would turn about. Benjamin began by killing some of 
the Israelites, about thirty men, and thought, “We have certainly beaten them, as we did in the first battle”. 

Jdg 20:40 But the signal, a column of smoke, began to rise from the town, and the Benjaminites looking back 
saw the whole town going up in flames to the sky. 

Jdg 20:41 The Israelites then turned about, and the Benjaminites were seized with terror, for they saw that 
disaster had struck them. 

Jdg 20:42 They broke before the Israelite onslaught and made for the desert, but the fighters pressed them 
hard, while the others coming out of the town took and slaughtered them from the rear. 

Jdg 20:43 They hemmed in the Benjaminites, pursued them relentlessly, crushing them opposite Gibeah on the 
east. 

Jdg 20:44 Of Benjamin, eighteen thousand men fell, all of them brave men. 

Jdg 20:45 They then turned tail and fled into the desert, towards the Rock of Rimmon. Five thousand of them 
were picked off on the roads, and the rest were relentlessly pursued as far as Gideon, two thousand of them 
being killed. 

Jdg 20:46 The total number of Benjaminites who fell that day was twenty-five thousand swordsmen, all of them 
brave men. 

Jdg 20:47 Six hundred men, however, turned tail and escaped into the desert, to the Rock of Rimmon, and 
there they stayed for four months. 

Jdg 20:48 The men of Israel then went back to the Benjaminites, and put them to the sword-people, livestock 
and everything else that came their way in the town. And they fired all the towns involved. 

Jdg 21:1 The men of Israel had sworn this oath at Mizpah, “None of us is to give his daughter in marriage to 
Benjamin”. 

Jdg 21 :2 The people went to Bethel and stayed there until evening, sitting before God and raising their voices, 
made a great lament, 

Jdg 21:3 and exclaiming, “Yahweh, God of Israel, why has this happened in Israel that a tribe should be missing 
from Israel today? 

Jdg 21 :4 The next day the people got up early and built an altar there; they presented burnt offerings and 
communion sacrifices. 

Jdg 21 :5 The Israelites then said, “Out of all the tribes of Israel, who has not come to Yahweh, to the assembly?”. 
— for they had sworn a solemn oath that anyone who did not come to Yahweh at Mizpah would certainly die. 

Jdg 21:6 Now the Israelites felt sorry about Benjamin their brother. “Today”, they said, “a tribe has been 
amputated from Israel. 

Jdg 21 :7 What shall we do to provide wives for those who are left, since we have sworn by Yahweh not to give 
them any of our own daughters in marriage?”. 

Jdg 21 :8 They then asked, “Out of the tribes of Israel, who is it that has not come to Yahweh at Mizpah?”. It was 
discovered that no one from Jabesh in Gilead had come to the camp for the assembly; 

Jdg 21:9 for, a muster having been called of the people, none of the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead was 
present. 

Jdg 21:10 The community then despatched twelve thousand of their bravest men there, with these orders: “Go 
and slaughter all the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead, including the women and children. 

Jdg 21:11 This is what you are to do. All males and all those women who have ever slept with a man, you will 
put under the curse of destruction, but the lives of the virgins you will spare”. And this they did. 



Jdg 21:12 Among the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead they found four hundred young virgins who had never 
slept with a man, and brought them to the camp (to Shiloh in the territory of Canaan). 

Jdg 21:13 The whole community then sent messengers to offer peace to the Benjaminites who were at the Rock 
of Rimmon. 

Jdg 21:14 Benjamin then came home: they were given those of the women of Jabesh in Gilead whose lives had 
been spared, but there were not enough for all. 

Jdg 21:15 The people felt sorry about Benjamin, Yahweh having made a breach in the tribes of Israel. 

Jdg 21:16 And the elders of the community said, “What shall we do to provide wives for the survivors, since the 
women of Benjamin have been wiped out?”. 

Jdg 21:17 They went on, “How can we preserve a remnant for Benjamin so that a tribe may not be lost to Israel? 
Jdg 21:18 We cannot give them our own daughters in marriage” —for the Israelites had taken an oath, 

“Accursed be the man who gives a wife to Benjamin!”. 

Jdg 21:19 “However”, they said, “there is the feast of Yahweh, held every year at Shiloh”. (The town lies north of 
Bethel, east of the highway that runs from Bethel up to Shechem, and south of Lebonah.) 

Jdg 21:20 So they told the Benjaminites to do as follows, “Put yourselves in ambush in the vineyards. 

Jdg 21 :21 Keep watch: when the girls of Shiloh come out in groups to dance, you then come out of the 
vineyards, each of you seize a wife from the girls of Shiloh and make for Benjaminite territory. 

Jdg 21 :22 If their fathers or brothers come and complain to us, we shall say, ‘Let us have them, since we could 
not take wives for everyone in the battle; and you could not give them to them, or you would then have been 
guilty’”. 

Jdg 21:23 The Benjaminites did this and, from the dancers whom they caught, took as many wives as there 
were men and then, setting off, went back to their heritage, rebuilt the towns and settled down in them. 

Jdg 21:24 The Israelites then dispersed, each man to rejoin his tribe and clan, each leaving that place for his 
own heritage. 

Jdg 21:25 In those days there was no king in Israel, and everyone did as he saw fit. 

Rut 1:1 In the days when the Judges were governing, a famine occurred in the country and a certain man from 
Bethlehem of Judah went-he, his wife and his two sons — to live in the Plains of Moab. 

Rut 1 :2 The man was called Elimelech, his wife Naomi and his two sons Mahlon and Chilion; they were 
Ephrathites from Bethlehem of Judah. Going to the Plains of Moab, they settled there. 

Rut 1 :3 Elimelech, Naomi’s husband, died, and she and her two sons were left. 

Rut 1 :4 These married Moabite women: one was called Orpah and the other Ruth. They lived there for about 
ten years. 

Rut 1 :5 Mahlon and Chilion then both died too, and Naomi was thus bereft of her two sons and her husband. 

Rut 1 :6 She then decided to come back from the Plains of Moab with her daughters-in-law, having heard in the 
Plains of Moab that God had visited his people and given them food. 

Rut 1 :7 So, with her daughters-in-law, she left the place where she was living and they took the road back to 
Judah. 

Rut 1 :8 Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, “Go back, each of you to your mother’s house. 

Rut 1 :9 May Yahweh show you faithful love, as you have done to those who have died and to me. Yahweh grant 
that you may each find happiness with a husband!”. She then kissed them, but they began weeping loudly, 

Rut 1:10 and said, “No, we shall go back with you to your people”. 

Rut 1:11 “Go home, daughters”, Naomi replied. “Why come with me? Have I any more sons in my womb to make 
husbands for you? 

Rut 1:12 Go home, daughters, go, for I am now too old to marry again. Even if I said, ‘I still have a hope: I shall 
take a husband this very night and shall bear more sons’, 

Rut 1:13 would you be prepared to wait for them until they were grown up? Would you refuse to marry for their 
sake? No, daughters, I am bitterly sorry for your sakes that the hand of Yahweh should have been raised against 
me”. 

Rut 1:14 They started weeping loudly all over again; Orpah then kissed her mother-in-law and went back to her 
people. But Ruth stayed with her. 

Rut 1:15 Naomi then said, “Look, your sister-in-law has gone back to her people and to her god. Go home, too; 
follow your sister-in-law”. 

Rut 1:16 But Ruth said, “Do not press me to leave you and to stop going with you, for wherever you go, I shall 
go, wherever you live, I shall live. Your people will be my people, and your God will be my God. 

Rut 1:17 Where you die, I shall die and there I shall be buried. Let Yahweh bring unnameable ills on me and 
worse ills, too, if anything but death should part me from you!”. 

Rut 1:18 Seeing that Ruth was determined to go with her, Naomi said no more. 

Rut 1:19 The two of them went on until they came to Bethlehem. Their arrival set the whole town astir, and the 
women said, “Can this be Naomi?”. 



Rut 1 :20 To this she replied, “Do not call me Naomi, call me Mara, for Shaddai has made my lot bitter. 

Rut 1:21 I departed full, and Yahweh has brought me home empty. Why, then, call me Naomi, since Yahweh 
has pronounced against me and Shaddai has made me wretched?”. 

Rut 1:22 This was how Naomi came home with her daughter-in-law, Ruth the Moabitess, on returning from the 
Plains of Moab. They arrived in Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest. 

Rut 2:1 Naomi had a kinsman on her husband’s side, well-to-do and of Elimelech’s clan. His name was Boaz. 
Rut 2:2 Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, “Let me go into the fields and glean ears of corn in the footsteps of 
some man who will look on me with favour”. She replied, “Go, daughter”. 

Rut 2:3 So she set out and went to glean in the fields behind the reapers. Chance led her to a plot of land 
belonging to Boaz of Elimelech’s clan. 

Rut 2:4 Boaz, as it happened, had just come from Bethlehem. “Yahweh be with you!”. he said to the reapers. 
“Yahweh bless you!”. they replied. 

Rut 2:5 Boaz said to a servant of his who was in charge of the reapers, “To whom does this young woman 
belong?”. 

Rut 2:6 And the servant in charge of the reapers replied, “The girl is the Moabitess, the one who came back with 
Naomi from the Plains of Moab. 

Rut 2:7 She said, ‘Please let me glean and pick up what falls from the sheaves behind the reapers’. Thus she 
came, and here she stayed, with hardly a rest from morning until now”. 

Rut 2:8 Boaz said to Ruth, “Listen to me, daughter. You must not go gleaning in any other field. You must not go 
away from here. Stay close to my work-women. 

Rut 2:9 Keep your eyes on whatever part of the field they are reaping and follow behind. I have forbidden my 
men to molest you. And if you are thirsty, go to the pitchers and drink what the servants have drawn”. 

Rut 2:10 Ruth fell on her face, prostrated herself and said, “How have I attracted your favour, for you to notice 
me, who am only a foreigner?”. 

Rut 2:1 1 Boaz replied, “I have been told all about the way you have behaved to your mother-in-law since your 
husband’s death, and how you left your own father and mother and the land where you were born to come to a 
people of whom you previously knew nothing. 

Rut 2:12 May Yahweh repay you for what you have done, and may you be richly rewarded by Yahweh, the God 
of Israel, under whose wings you have come for refuge!”. 

Rut 2:13 She said, “My lord, I hope you will always look on me with favour! You have comforted and encouraged 
me, though I am not even the equal of one of your work-women”. 

Rut 2:14 When it was time to eat, Boaz said to her, “Come and eat some of this bread and dip your piece in the 
vinegar”. Ruth sat down beside the reapers and Boaz made a heap of roasted grain for her; she ate till her 
hunger was satisfied, and she had some left over. 

Rut 2:15 When she had got up to glean, Boaz gave orders to his work-people, “Let her glean among the 
sheaves themselves. Do not molest her. 

Rut 2:16 And be sure you pull a few ears of corn out of the bundles and drop them. Let her glean them, and do 
not scold her”. 

Rut 2:17 So she gleaned in the field till evening. Then she beat out what she had gleaned and it came to about 
a bushel of barley. 

Rut 2:18 Taking it with her, she went back to the town. Her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. Ruth also 
took out what she had kept after eating all she wanted, and gave that to her. 

Rut 2:19 Her mother-in-law said, “Where have you been gleaning today? Where have you been working? 
Blessed be the man who took notice of you!”. Ruth told her mother-in-law in whose field she had been working. 
“The name of the man with whom I have been working today”, she said, “is Boaz”. 

Rut 2:20 Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, “May he be blessed by Yahweh who does not withhold his faithful 
love from living or dead! This man”, Naomi added, “is a close relation of ours. He is one of those who have the 
right of redemption over us”. 

Rut 2:21 Ruth the Moabitess said to her mother-in-law, “He also said, ‘Stay with my work-people until they have 
finished my whole harvest’”. 

Rut 2:22 Naomi said to Ruth, her daughter-in-law, “It is better for you, daughter, to go with his work-women than 
to go to some other field where you might be ill-treated”. 

Rut 2:23 So she stayed with Boaz’s work-women, and gleaned until the barley and wheat harvests were 
finished. And she went on living with her mother-in-law. 

Rut 3:1 Her mother-in-law Naomi then said, “Daughter, is it not my duty to see you happily settled? 

Rut 3:2 And Boaz, the man with whose work-women you were, is he not our kinsman? Tonight he will be 
winnowing the barley on the threshing-floor. 

Rut 3:3 So wash and perfume yourself, put on your cloak and go down to the threshing-floor. Don’t let him 
recognise you while he is still eating and drinking. 



Rut 3:4 But when he lies down, take note where he lies, then go and turn back the covering at his feet and lie 
down yourself. He will tell you what to do”. 

Rut 3:5 Ruth said, “I shall do everything you tell me”. 

Rut 3:6 So she went down to the threshing-floor and did everything her mother-in-law had told her. 

Rut 3:7 When Boaz had finished eating and drinking, he went off happily and lay down beside the pile of barley. 
Ruth then quietly went, turned back the covering at his feet and lay down. 

Rut 3:8 In the middle of the night, he woke up with a shock and looked about him; and there lying at his feet was 
a woman. 

Rut 3:9 “Who are you?”. he said; and she replied, “I am your servant Ruth. Spread the skirt of your cloak over 
your servant for you have the right of redemption over me”. 

Rut 3:10 “May Yahweh bless you, daughter”, he said, “for this second act of faithful love of yours is greater than 
the first, since you have not run after young men, poor or rich. 

Rut 3:1 1 Don’t be afraid, daughter, I shall do everything you ask, since the people at the gate of my town all 
know that you are a woman of great worth. 

Rut 3:12 But, though it is true that I have the right of redemption over you, you have a kinsman closer than 
myself. 

Rut 3:13 Stay here for tonight and, in the morning, if he wishes to exercise his right over you, very well, let him 
redeem you. But if he does not wish to do so, then as Yahweh lives, I shall redeem you. Lie here till morning”. 

Rut 3:14 So she lay at his feet till morning, but got up before the hour when one man can recognise another; 
and he thought, “It must not be known that this woman came to the threshing-floor”. 

Rut 3:15 He then said, “Let me have the cloak you are wearing, hold it out!”. She held it out while he put six 
measures of barley into it and then loaded it on to her; and off she went to the town. 

Rut 3:16 When Ruth got home, her mother-in-law asked her, “How did things go with you, daughter?”. She then 
told her everything that the man had done for her. 

Rut 3:17 “He gave me these six measures of barley and said, ‘You must not go home empty-handed to your 
mother-in-law’”. 

Rut 3:18 Naomi said, “Do nothing, daughter, until you see how things have gone; I am sure he will not rest until 
he has settled the matter this very day”. 

Rut 4:1 Boaz, meanwhile, had gone up to the gate and sat down, and the relative of whom he had spoken then 
came by. Boaz said to him, “Here, my friend, come and sit down”; the man came and sat down. 

Rut 4:2 Boaz then picked out ten of the town’s elders and said, “Sit down here”; they sat down. 

Rut 4:3 Boaz then said to the man who had the right of redemption, “Naomi, who has come back from the Plains 
of Moab, is selling the piece of land that belonged to our brother, Elimelech. 

Rut 4:4 I thought I should tell you about this and say, ‘Acquire it in the presence of the men who are sitting here 
and in the presence of the elders of my people. If you want to use your right of redemption, redeem it; if you do 
not, tell me so that I know, for I am the only person to redeem it besides yourself, and I myself come after you’”. 
The man said, “I am willing to redeem it”. 

Rut 4:5 Boaz then said, “The day you acquire the field from Naomi, you also acquire Ruth the Moabitess, the 
wife of the man who has died, to perpetuate the dead man’s name in his inheritance”. 

Rut 4:6 The man with the right of redemption then said, “I cannot use my right of redemption without 
jeopardising my own inheritance. Since I cannot use my right of redemption, exercise the right yourself”. 

Rut 4:7 Now, in former times, it was the custom in Israel to confirm a transaction in matters of redemption or 
inheritance by one of the parties taking off his sandal and giving it to the other. This was how agreements were 
ratified in Israel. 

Rut 4:8 So, when the man with the right of redemption said to Boaz, “Acquire it for yourself”, he took off his 
sandal. 

Rut 4:9 Boaz then said to the elders and all the people there, “Today you are witnesses that from Naomi I 
acquire everything that used to belong to Elimelech, and everything that used to belong to Mahlon and Chilion 
Rut 4:10 and that I am also acquiring Ruth the Moabitess, Mahlon’s widow, to be my wife, to perpetuate the 
dead man’s name in his inheritance, so that the dead man’s name will not be lost among his brothers and at the 
gate of his town. Today you are witnesses to this”. 

Rut 4:1 1 All the people at the gate said, “We are witnesses”; and the elders said, “May Yahweh make the woman 
about to enter your family like Rachel and Leah who together built up the House of Israel. Grow mighty in 
Ephrathah, be renowned in Bethlehem! 

Rut 4:12 And through the children Yahweh will give you by this young woman, may your family be like the family 
of Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah”. 

Rut 4:13 So Boaz took Ruth and she became his wife. And when they came together, Yahweh made her 
conceive and she bore a son. 

Rut 4:14 And the women said to Naomi, “Blessed be Yahweh who has not left you today without anyone to 



redeem you. May his name be praised in Israel! 

Rut 4:15 The child will be a comfort to you and the prop of your old age, for he has been born to the daughter- 
in-law who loves you and is more to you than seven sons”. 

Rut 4:16 And Naomi, taking the child, held him to her breast; and she it was who looked after him. 

Rut 4:17 And the women of the neighbourhood gave him a name. “A son”, they said, “has been born to Naomi”, 
and they called him Obed. This was the father of Jesse, the father of David. 

Rut 4:18 These are the descendants of Perez. Perez fathered Hezron, 

Rut 4:19 Hezron fathered Ram, Ram fathered Amminadab, 

Rut 4:20 Amminadab fathered Nahshon, Nahshon fathered Salmon, 

Rut 4:21 Salmon fathered Boaz, Boaz fathered Obed, 

Rut 4:22 Obed fathered Jesse, and Jesse fathered David. 

ISa 1:1 There was a man of Ramathaim, a Zuphite from the highlands of Ephraim whose name was Elkanah 
son of Jeroham, son of Elihu, son of Tohu, son ofZuph, an Ephraimite. 

ISa 1:2 He had two wives, one called Hannah, the other Peninnah; Peninnah had children but Hannah had 
none. 

ISa 1:3 Every year this man used to go up from his town to worship, and to sacrifice to Yahweh Sabaoth at 
Shiloh. (The two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there as priests of Yahweh.) 

ISa 1:4 One day Elkanah offered a sacrifice. Now he used to give portions to Peninnah and to all her sons and 
daughters; 

ISa 1:5 to Hannah, however, he would give only one portion: for, although he loved Hannah more, Yahweh had 
made her barren. 

ISa 1:6 Furthermore, her rival would taunt and provoke her, because Yahweh had made her womb barren. 

ISa 1:7 And this went on year after year; every time they went up to the temple of Yahweh she used to taunt 
her. On that day she wept and would not eat anything; 

ISa 1:8 so her husband Elkanah said, “Hannah, why are you crying? Why are you not eating anything? Why are 
you so sad? Am I not more to you than ten sons?”. 

ISa 1:9 When they had finished eating in the room, Hannah got up and stood before Yahweh. Eli the priest was 
sitting on his seat by the doorpost of the temple of Yahweh. 

ISa 1:10 In the bitterness of her soul she prayed to Yahweh with many tears, 

ISa 1:11 and she made this vow, “Yahweh Sabaoth! Should you condescend to notice the humiliation of your 
servant and keep her in mind instead of disregarding your servant, and give her a boy, I will give him to Yahweh 
for the whole of his life and no razor shall ever touch his head”. 

ISa 1:12 While she went on praying to Yahweh, Eli was watching her mouth, 

ISa 1:13 for Hannah was speaking under her breath; her lips were moving but her voice could not be heard, 
and Eli thought that she was drunk. 

ISa 1:14 Eli said, “How much longer are you going to stay drunk? Get rid of your wine”. 

ISa 1:15 “No, my lord”, Hannah replied, “I am a woman in great trouble; I have not been drinking wine or strong 
drink — I am pouring out my soul before Yahweh. 

ISa 1:16 Do not take your servant for a worthless woman; all this time I have been speaking from the depth of 
my grief and my resentment”. 

ISa 1:17 Eli then replied, “Go in peace, and may the God of Israel grant what you have asked of him”. 

ISa 1:18 To which she said, “May your servant find favour in your sight”. With that, the woman went away; she 
began eating and was dejected no longer. 

ISa 1:19 They got up early in the morning and, after worshipping Yahweh, set out and went home to Ramah. 
Elkanah lay with his wife Hannah, and Yahweh remembered her. 

ISa 1:20 Hannah conceived and, in due course, gave birth to a son, whom she named Samuel, “since”, she 
said, “I asked Yahweh for him”. 

ISa 1:21 Elkanah, the husband, went up with all his family to offer the annual sacrifice to Yahweh and to fulfil 
his vow. 

1 Sa 1 :22 However, Hannah did not go up, having said to her husband, “Not before the child has been weaned. 
Then I shall bring him and present him before Yahweh and he will stay there for ever”. 

ISa 1 :23 Elkanah her husband then said to her, “Do what you think fit; wait until you have weaned him. May 
Yahweh bring about what he has said”. So the woman stayed behind and nursed her child until she weaned him. 
ISa 1:24 When she had weaned him, she took him up with her, as well as a three-year-old bull, an <i>ephah</i> of 
flour and a skin of wine, and took him into the temple of Yahweh at Shiloh; the child was very young. 

ISa 1:25 They sacrificed the bull and led the child to Eli. 

ISa 1:26 She said, “If you please, my lord! As you live, my lord, I am the woman who stood beside you here, 
praying to Yahweh. 

1 Sa 1 :27 This is the child for which I was praying, and Yahweh has granted me what I asked of him. 



1 Sa 1 :28 Now I make him over to Yahweh for the whole of his life. He is made over to Yahweh”. They then 
worshipped Yahweh there. 

ISa 2:1 Hannah then prayed as follows: My heart exults in Yahweh, in my God is my strength lifted up, my 
mouth derides my foes, for I rejoice in your deliverance. 

ISa 2:2 There is no Holy One like Yahweh, (indeed, there is none but you) no Rock like our God. 

ISa 2:3 Do not keep talking so proudly, let no arrogance come from your mouth, for Yahweh is a wise God, his 
to weigh up deeds. 

ISa 2:4 The bow of the mighty has been broken but those who were tottering are now braced with strength. 

1 Sa 2:5 The full fed are hiring themselves out for bread but the hungry need labour no more; the barren woman 
bears sevenfold but the mother of many is left desolate. 

ISa 2:6 Yahweh gives death and life, brings down to Sheol and draws up; 

ISa 2:7 Yahweh makes poor and rich, he humbles and also exalts. 

1 Sa 2:8 He raises the poor from the dust, he lifts the needy from the dunghill to give them a place with princes, 
to assign them a seat of honour; for to Yahweh belong the pillars of the earth, on these he has poised the world. 
ISa 2:9 He safeguards the steps of his faithful but the wicked vanish in darkness (for human strength can win 
no victories). 

ISa 2:10 Yahweh, his enemies are shattered, the Most High thunders in the heavens. Yahweh judges the ends 
of the earth, he endows his king with power, he raises up the strength of his Anointed. 

ISa 2:1 1 Elkanah then went home to Ramah, but the child stayed in Yahweh’s service, in the presence of Eli 
the priest. 

ISa 2:12 Now the sons of Eli were scoundrels; they cared nothing for Yahweh 

ISa 2:13 nor for what was due to the priests from the people. Whenever anyone offered a sacrifice, the priest’s 
servant would come with a three-pronged fork in his hand while the meat was being cooked; 

ISa 2:14 he would thrust this into cauldron or pan, or dish or pot, and the priest claimed for his own whatever 
the fork brought up. That was how they behaved with all the Israelites who came there to Shiloh. 

ISa 2:15 The priest’s servant would even come up before the fat had been burnt and say to the person who 
was making the sacrifice, “Give the priest some meat for him to roast. He will not accept boiled meat from you, 
only raw”. 

ISa 2:16 Then, if the person replied, “Let the fat be burnt first, and then take for yourself whatever you choose”, 
he would retort, “No! You must give it to me now or I shall take it by force”. 

ISa 2:17 The young men’s sin was very great in Yahweh’s eyes, because they treated with contempt the 
offering made to Yahweh. 

ISa 2:18 Samuel was in Yahweh’s service, a child wearing a linen loincloth. 

ISa 2:19 His mother used to make him a little coat which she brought him each year when she came up with 
her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice. 

ISa 2:20 Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife and say, “May Yahweh grant you an heir by this woman in 
exchange for the one which she has made over to Yahweh”, and they would go home. 

ISa 2:21 Yahweh visited Hannah; she conceived and gave birth to three sons and two daughters. Meanwhile, 
the child Samuel grew up in Yahweh’s presence. 

ISa 2:22 Although very old, Eli heard about everything that his sons were doing to all Israel, 

ISa 2:23 and said, “Why are you behaving as all the people say you are? 

ISa 2:24 No, my sons, what I hear reported by the people of Yahweh is not good. 

1 Sa 2:25 If one person sins against another, God will be the arbiter, but if he sins against Yahweh, who will 
intercede for him?”. But they did not listen to their father’s words, for Yahweh was bent on killing them. 

ISa 2:26 Meanwhile, the child Samuel went on growing in stature and in favour both with Yahweh and with 
people. 

1 Sa 2:27 A man of God came to Eli and said to him, “This is what Yahweh says, ‘Did I not reveal myself to your 
father’s family when they were in Egypt as slaves in Pharaoh’s household? 

1 Sa 2:28 Did I not single him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to go up to my altar, to burn the 
offering, to carry the ephod in my presence; and did I not grant all the burnt offerings made by the Israelites to 
your father’s family? 

ISa 2:29 Why do you trample on the offering and on the sacrifice which I have ordered for my Dwelling, and 
honour your sons more than me, by growing fat on the best of the offerings of Israel, my people? 

1 Sa 2:30 Whereäs — this is what Yahweh, God of Israel, declares — 1 had promised that your family and your 
father’s family would walk in my presence for ever, now, however — this is what Yahweh declares — nothing of 
the sort! Those who honour me I honour in my turn, and those who despise me will be an object of contempt. 

1 Sa 2:31 Be sure, the days are coming when I shall cut off your strength and the strength of your father’s family, 
so that no one in your family will live to old age. 

1 Sa 2:32 Beside the Dwelling, you will see all the benefits that I shall confer on Israel, but no one in your family 



will ever live to old age. 

1 Sa 2:33 I shall keep one of you at my altar for his eyes to go blind and his soul to wither, but the bulk of your 
family will die by the sword. 

1 Sa 2:34 “‘What happens to your two sons Hophni and Phinehas will be a sign for you: on the same day both 
will die. 

ISa 2:35 I shall raise myself a faithful priest, who will do as I intend and as I desire. I shall build him an enduring 
House and he will walk in the presence of my Anointed for ever. 

1 Sa 2:36 The members of your House who survive will come and beg him on their knees for a silver coin and a 
loaf of bread and say: Please give me some priestly work, so that I can have a scrap of bread to eat’”. 

ISa 3:1 Now, the boy Samuel was serving Yahweh in the presence of Eli; in those days it was rare for Yahweh 
to speak; visions were uncommon. 

ISa 3:2 One day, it happened that Eli was lying down in his room. His eyes were beginning to grow dim; he 
could no longer see. 

ISa 3:3 The lamp of God had not yet gone out, and Samuel was lying in Yahweh’s sanctuary, where the ark of 
God was, 

ISa 3:4 when Yahweh called, “Samuel! Samuel!”. He answered, “Here I am”, 

ISa 3:5 and, running to Eli, he said, “Here I am, as you called me”. Eli said, “I did not call. Go back and lie down”. 
So he went and lay down. 

ISa 3:6 And again Yahweh called, “Samuel! Samuel!”. He got up and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, as you 
called me”. He replied, “I did not call, my son; go back and lie down”. 

ISa 3:7 As yet, Samuel had no knowledge of Yahweh and the word of Yahweh had not yet been revealed to 
him. 

1 Sa 3:8 Again Yahweh called, the third time. He got up and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, as you called me”. 
Eli then understood that Yahweh was calling the child, 

1 Sa 3:9 and he said to Samuel, “Go and lie down, and if someöne calls say, ‘Speak, Yahweh; for your servant is 
listening’”. So Samuel went and lay down in his place. 

ISa 3:10 Yahweh then came and stood by, calling as he had done before, “Samuel! Samuel!”. Samuel 
answered, “Speak, Yahweh; for your servant is listening”. 

ISa 3:1 1 Yahweh then said to Samuel, “I am going to do something in Israel which will make the ears of all who 
hear of it ring. 

ISa 3:12 I shall carry out that day against Eli everything that I have said about his family, from beginning to end. 
ISa 3:13 You are to tell him that I condemn his family for ever, since he is aware that his sons have been 
cursing God and yet has not corrected them. 

ISa 3:14 Therefore — 1 swear it to the family of Eli — no sacrifice or offering shall ever expiate the guilt of Eli’s 
family”. 

ISa 3:15 Samuel lay where he was until morning and then opened the doors of Yahweh’s temple. Samuel was 
afraid to tell Eli about the vision, 

ISa 3:16 but Eli called Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son”. “Here I am”, he replied. 

ISa 3:17 Eli asked, “What message did he give you? Please do not hide it from me. May God bring unnameable 
ills on you and worse ones, too, if you hide from me anything of what he said to you”. 

ISa 3:18 Samuel then told him everything, hiding nothing from him. Eli said, “He is Yahweh; let him do what he 
thinks good”. 

ISa 3:19 Samuel grew up. Yahweh was with him and did not let a single word fall to the ground of all that he 
had told him. 

ISa 3:20 All Israel knew, from Dan to Beersheba, that Samuel was attested as a prophet of Yahweh. 

ISa 3:21 Yahweh continued to manifest himself at Shiloh, revealing himself to Samuel there, 

ISa 4:1 and, for all Israel, the word of Samuel was as the word of Yahweh; since Eli was very old and his sons 
persisted in their wicked behaviour towards Yahweh. It happened at that time that the Philistines mustered to 
make war on Israel and Israel went out to meet them in war, pitching camp near Ebenezer while the Philistines 
pitched camp at Aphek. 

ISa 4:2 The Philistines drew up their battle-line against Israel, the fighting was fierce, and Israel was beaten by 
the Philistines: about four thousand men in their ranks were killed on the field of battle. 

ISa 4:3 When the troops returned to camp, the elders of Israel said, “Why has Yahweh caused us to be beaten 
by the Philistines today? Let us fetch the ark of our God from Shiloh so that, when it goes with us, it may save us 
from the clutches of our enemies”. 

1 Sa 4:4 So the troops sent to Shiloh and brought away the ark of Yahweh Sabaoth enthroned on the winged 
creatures; the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, came with the ark. 

1 Sa 4:5 When the ark of Yahweh arrived in the camp, all Israel raised a great war cry so that the earth 
resounded. 



ISa 4:6 When the Philistines heard the noise of the war cry, they said, “What can this great war cry in the 
Hebrew camp mean?”. And they realised that the ark of Yahweh had come into the camp. 

1 Sa 4:7 At this, the Philistines were afraid; for they said, “God has come into the camp. Disaster!”. they said. “For 
nothing like this has ever happened before. 

ISa 4:8 Disaster! Who will rescue us from the clutches of this mighty God? This was the God who struck down 
Egypt with every kind of misfortune in the desert. 

ISa 4:9 But take courage and be men, Philistines, or you will become slaves to the Hebrews as they have been 
slaves to you. Be men and fight”. 

ISa 4:10 So the Philistines gave battle and Israel was defeated, each man fleeing to his tent. The slaughter was 
very great: on the Israelite side, thirty thousand foot soldiers fell. 

ISa 4:1 1 The ark of God was captured too, and Hophni and Phinehas the two sons of Eli died. 

ISa 4:12 A Benjaminite ran from the battle-line and reached Shiloh the same day, his clothes torn and dust on 
his head. 

ISa 4:13 When he arrived, Eli was sitting on his seat beside the gate watching the road, for his heart was 
trembling for the ark of God. The man came into the town and told the news, whereupon cries of anguish filled 
the town. 

ISa 4:14 Eli heard the sound and asked, “What does this uproar mean?”. The man hurried on and told Eli. 

ISa 4:15 Eli was ninety-eight years old; his gaze was fixed; he was blind. 

ISa 4:16 The man said to Eli, “I have come from the camp. I escaped from the battle-line today”. “My son”, said 
Eli, “what happened?”. 

ISa 4:17 The messenger replied, “Israel has fled before the Philistines; the army has been utterly routed. What 
is worse, your two sons are dead and the ark of God has been captured”. 

ISa 4:18 When he mentioned the ark of God, Eli fell backwards off his seat by the gate and broke his neck and 
died, for he was old and heavy. He had been judge of Israel for forty years. 

ISa 4:19 Now his daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinehas, was with child and near her time. When she heard the 
news that the ark of God had been captured and that her father-in-law and husband were dead she crouched 
down and gave birth, for her labour pains had come on. 

ISa 4:20 When she was at the point of death, the women at her side said, “Do not be afraid; you have given 
birth to a son”. But she did not answer and took no notice. 

ISa 4:21 She named the child Ichabod, saying, “The glory has gone from Israel”, alluding to the capture of the 
ark of God and to her father-in-law and husband. 

ISa 4:22 She said, “The glory has gone from Israel, because the ark of God has been captured”. 

ISa 5:1 When the Philistines had captured the ark of God, they took it from Ebenezerto Ashdod. 

ISa 5:2 Taking the ark of God, the Philistines put it in the temple of Dagon, setting it down beside Dagon. 

1 Sa 5:3 When the people of Ashdod got up the following morning and went to the temple of Dagon, there lay 
Dagon face down on the ground before the ark of Yahweh. They picked Dagon up and put him back in his place. 
ISa 5:4 But when they got up on the following morning, there lay Dagon face down on the ground before the ark 
of Yahweh, and Dagon’s head and two hands lay severed on the threshold; only the trunk of Dagon was left in 
its place. 

ISa 5:5 This is why the priests of Dagon and the people frequenting Dagon’s temple never step on Dagon’s 
threshold in Ashdod, even today. 

ISa 5:6 Yahweh oppressed the people of Ashdod; he ravaged them and afflicted them with tumours — Ashdod 
and its territory. When the people of Ashdod saw what was happening they said, 

ISa 5:7 “The ark of the God of Israel must not stay here with us, for he is oppressing us and our god Dagon”. 

ISa 5:8 So they summoned all the Philistine chiefs to them, and said, “What shall we do with the ark of the God 
of Israel?”. They decided, “The ark of the God of Israel shall be taken away to Gath”. So they took the ark of the 
God of Israel to Gath. 

ISa 5:9 But after they had taken it there, Yahweh oppressed that town and a great panic broke out; afflicting the 
people of the town from highest to lowest, he brought them out in tumours too. 

ISa 5:10 They then sent the ark of God to Ekron, but when it came to Ekron the Ekronites shouted, “They have 
brought me the ark of the God of Israel to kill me and my people!”. 

ISa 5:1 1 They summoned all the Philistine chiefs and said, “Send the ark of the God of Israel away; let it go 
back to where it belongs and not kill me and my people” — for there was mortal panic throughout the town; God 
was oppressing them. 

ISa 5:12 The people who did not die were afflicted with tumours, and the wailing from the town rose to the sky. 
ISa 6:1 The ark of Yahweh was in Philistine territory for seven months. 

1 Sa 6:2 The Philistines then called for their priests and diviners and asked, “What shall we do with the ark of 
Yahweh? Tell us how to send it back to where it belongs”. 

ISa 6:3 They replied, “If you send the ark of the God of Israel away, you must certainly not send it away without 



a gift; you must pay him a guilt offering. You will then recover and will realise why he continually oppressed you”. 
ISa 6:4 They then asked, “What guilt offering ought we to pay him?”. They replied, “Corresponding to the number 
of Philistine chiefs: five golden tumours and five golden rats, since the same plague afflicted your chiefs as the 
rest of you. 

1 Sa 6:5 So make models of your tumours and models of your rats ravaging the territory, and pay honour to the 
God of Israel. Then perhaps he will stop oppressing you, your gods and your country. 

ISa 6:6 Why should you be as stubborn as Egypt and Pharaoh were? After he had brought disasters on them, 
did they not let the people leave? 

ISa 6:7 Now, then, take and fit out a new cart, and two milch cows that have never borne the yoke. Then 
harness the cows to the cart and take their calves back to the byre. 

1 Sa 6:8 Then take the ark of Yahweh, place it on the cart, and put the golden objects which you are paying him 
as guilt offering in a box beside it; and then send it off on its own. 

ISa 6:9 Watch it; if it goes up the road to its own territory, towards Beth-Shemesh, then he was responsible for 
this great harm to us; but if not, we shall know that it was not his hand that struck us, and that this has happened 
to us by chance”. 

ISa 6:10 The people did this. They took two milch cows and harnessed them to the cart, shutting their calves in 
the byre. 

ISa 6:1 1 They then put the ark of Yahweh on the cart, with the box and the golden rats and the models of their 
tumours. 

ISa 6:12 The cows made straight for Beth-Shemesh, keeping to the one road, lowing as they went and turning 
neither to right nor to left. The Philistine chiefs followed them as far as the boundaries of Beth-Shemesh. 

ISa 6:13 The people of Beth-Shemesh were reaping the wheat harvest in the plain when they looked up and 
saw the ark and went joyfully to meet it. 

ISa 6:14 When the cart came to the field of Joshua of Beth-Shemesh, it stopped. There was a large stone 
there, and they cut up the wood of the cart and offered the cows as a burnt offering to Yahweh. 

ISa 6:15 The Levites had taken down the ark of Yahweh and the box with it containing the golden objects and 
put these on the large stone. That day the people of Beth-Shemesh presented burnt offerings and made 
sacrifices to Yahweh. 

ISa 6:16 The five chiefs of the Philistines, having witnessed this, went back to Ekron the same day. 

ISa 6:17 The golden tumours paid by the Philistines as a guilt offering to Yahweh were as follows: one for 
Ashdod, one for Gaza, one for Ashkelon, one for Gath, one for Ekron; 

ISa 6:18 and golden rats to the number of all the Philistine towns, those of the five chiefs, from fortified towns 
down to open villages: still to this day the large stone in the field of Joshua of Beth-Shemesh, on which they put 
the ark of Yahweh, is a witness. 

ISa 6:19 Of the people of Beth-Shemesh the sons of Jeconiah had not rejoiced when they saw the ark of 
Yahweh, and Yahweh struck down seventy of them. The people mourned because Yahweh had struck them so 
fiercely. 

ISa 6:20 The people of Beth-Shemesh then said, “Who can stand his ground before Yahweh, this holy God? To 
whom shall he go, so that we are rid of him?”. 

ISa 6:21 So they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kiriath-Jearim, to say, “The Philistines have sent back 
the ark of Yahweh; come down and take it up to your town”. 

ISa 7:1 The men of Kiriath-Jearim came and, taking up the ark of Yahweh, brought it to the house of Abinadab 
on the hill, and consecrated his son Eleazar to guard the ark of Yahweh. 

ISa 7:2 From the day when the ark was installed at Kiriath-Jearim, a long time went by — twenty years — and 
the whole House of Israel longed for Yahweh. 

ISa 7:3 Samuel then spoke as follows to the whole House of Israel, “If you are returning to Yahweh with all your 
heart, banish the foreign gods and Astartes which you now have, and set your heart on Yahweh and serve him 
alone; and he will deliver you from the power of the Philistines”. 

ISa 7:4 And the Israelites banished the Baals and Astartes and served Yahweh alone. 

ISa 7:5 Samuel then said, “Muster all Israel at Mizpah and I shall plead with Yahweh for you”. 

ISa 7:6 So they mustered at Mizpah and drew water and poured it out before Yahweh. They fasted that day 
and declared, “We have sinned against Yahweh. 1 And Samuel was judge over the Israelites at Mizpah. 

ISa 7:7 When the Philistines heard that the Israelites had mustered at Mizpah, the Philistine chiefs marched on 
Israel; and when the Israelites heard this, they were afraid of the Philistines. 

ISa 7:8 They said to Samuel, “Do not stop calling on Yahweh our God to rescue us from the power of the 
Philistines”. 

ISa 7:9 Samuel took a sucking lamb and presented it as a burnt offering to Yahweh, and he called on Yahweh 
on behalf of Israel and Yahweh heard him. 

ISa 7:10 While Samuel was in the act of presenting burnt offering, the Philistines joined battle with Israel, but 



that day Yahweh thundered violently over the Philistines, threw them into panic and Israel defeated them. 

ISa 7:1 1 The men of Israel sallied out from Mizpah in pursuit of the Philistines and beat them all the way to 
below Beth-Car. 

ISa 7:12 Samuel then took a stone and erected it between Mizpah and the Tooth, and gave it the name 
Ebenezer, saying, “Yahweh helped us as far as this”. 

ISa 7:13 So the Philistines were humbled and no longer came into Israelite territory; Yahweh oppressed the 
Philistines throughout the life of Samuel. 

ISa 7:14 The towns which the Philistines had taken from Israel were given back to Israel, from Ekron all the 
way to Gath, and Israel freed their territory from the power of the Philistines. There was peace, too, between 
Israel and the Amorites. 

ISa 7:15 Samuel was judge over Israel throughout his life. 

ISa 7:16 Each year he went on circuit through Bethel and Gilgal and Mizpah and judged Israel in all these 
places. 

ISa 7:17 He would then return to Ramah, since his home was there; there too he judged Israel. And there he 
built an altar to Yahweh. 

ISa 8:1 When Samuel grew old, he appointed his sons as judges of Israel. 

1 Sa 8:2 His eldest son was called Joel and his second one, Abijah; they were judges at Beersheba. 

1 Sa 8:3 His sons did not follow his example but, seduced by the love of money, took bribes and gave biased 
verdicts. 

ISa 8:4 The elders of Israel all assembled, went back to Samuel at Ramah, and said, 

1 Sa 8:5 “Look, you are old, and your sons are not following your example. So give us a king to judge us, like the 
other nations”. 

1 Sa 8:6 Samuel thought that it was wrong of them to say, “Let us have a king to judge us”, so he prayed to 
Yahweh. 

ISa 8:7 But Yahweh said to Samuel, “Obey the voice of the people in all that they say to you: it is not you they 
have rejected 

1 Sa 8:8 but me, not wishing me to reign over them any more. They are now doing to you exactly what they have 
done to me since the day I brought them out of Egypt until now, deserting me and serving other gods. 

1 Sa 8:9 So, do what they ask; only, you must give them a solemn warning, and must tell them what the king 
who is to reign over them will do”. 

ISa 8:10 Everything that Yahweh had said, Samuel then repeated to the people who were asking him for a 
king. 

ISa 8:1 1 He said, “This is what the king who is to reign over you will do. He will take your sons and direct them 
to his chariotry and cavalry, and they will run in front of his chariot. 

ISa 8:12 He will use them as leaders of a thousand and leaders of fifty; he will make them plough his fields and 
gather in his harvest and make his weapons of war and the gear for his chariots. 

ISa 8:13 He will take your daughters as perfumers, cooks and bakers. 

ISa 8:14 He will take the best of your fields, your vineyards and your olive groves and give them to his officials. 
ISa 8:15 He will tithe your crops and vineyards to provide for his courtiers and his officials. 

ISa 8:16 He will take the best of your servants, men and women, of your oxen and your donkeys, and make 
them work for him. 

ISa 8:17 He will tithe your flocks, and you yourselves will become his slaves. 

ISa 8:18 When that day comes, you will cry aloud because of the king you have chosen for yourselves, but on 
that day Yahweh will not hear you”. 

ISa 8:19 The people, however, refused to listen to Samuel. They said, “No! We are determined to have a king, 

1 Sa 8:20 so that we can be like the other nations, with our own king to rule us and lead us and fight our battles”. 
ISa 8:21 Samuel listened to all that the people had to say and repeated it in Yahweh’s ear. 

ISa 8:22 Yahweh then said to Samuel, “Do as they ask and give them a king”. Samuel then said to the 
Israelites, “Go home, each of you, to his own town”. 

ISa 9:1 Among the men of Benjamin was a man called Kish son of Abiel, son of Zeror, son of Becorath, son of 
Aphiah; a Benjaminite and a person of rank. 

1 Sa 9:2 He had a son called Saul, a handsome man in the prime of life. Of all the Israelites there was no one 
more handsome than he; he stood head and shoulders taller than anyone else. 

ISa 9:3 Now since the donkeys belonging to Kish, Saul’s father, had strayed, Kish said to his son Saul, “My son, 
take one of the servants with you and be off; go and look for the donkeys”. 

1 Sa 9:4 They went through the highlands of Ephraim, they went through the territory of Shalishah, and did not 
find them; they went through the territory of Shaalim but they were not there; they went through the territory of 
Benjamin and did not find them. 

ISa 9:5 When they reached the territory of Zuph, Saul said to the servant who was with him, “Come on, let us 



go back or my father will stop worrying over the donkeys and start being anxious about us”. 

ISa 9:6 The servant, however, replied, “Look, there is a man of God in this town, a man who is held in honour; 
everything he says comes true. Let us go there, then; perhaps he will be able to show us the way that we should 
take”. 

1 Sa 9:7 Saul said to his servant, “But if we do go, what can we take to the man? The food in our sacks is 
finished, and we have no present to offer the man of God. What else have we got?”. 

1 Sa 9:8 The servant spoke up again and said to Saul, “Look, I happen to have a quarter of a silver shekel; I 
shall give that to the man of God, for him to tell us which way to go”. 

ISa 9:9 In Israel, in olden days, when anyone used to go to consult God, he would say, “Come on, let us go to 
the seer”, for a man who is now called a “prophet” used to be called a “seer” in olden days. 

ISa 9:10 Saul then said to his servant, “Well said! Come on, let us go”. And they went off to the town where the 
man of God was. 

ISa 9:1 1 As they were going up the slope to the town they came across some girls going out to draw water, and 
said to them, “Is the seer there?”. 

ISa 9:12 The girls replied, “He is. He arrived a moment or two ahead of you. You had better hurry: he has just 
come to town because the people are having a sacrifice today on the high place. 

ISa 9:13 You can catch him as soon as you go into the town, before he goes up to the high place for the meal. 
The people will not eat until he comes, since he must bless the sacrifice; after that, the guests will start eating. If 
you go up now, you will find him straight away”. 

ISa 9:14 So they went up to the town and, as they were going through the gate, Samuel came out towards 
them on his way to the high place. 

ISa 9:15 Now, Yahweh had given Samuel a revelation the day before Saul came, saying, 

ISa 9:16 “About this time tomorrow, I shall send you a man from the territory of Benjamin; you are to anoint him 
as prince of my people Israel, and he will save my people from the power of the Philistines; for I have seen the 
misery of my people and their cries of anguish have come to me”. 

ISa 9:17 When Samuel saw Saul, Yahweh told him, “That is the man of whom I said to you, ‘He is to govern my 
people’”. 

ISa 9:18 Saul accosted Samuel in the gateway and said, “Tell me, please, where the seer’s house is”. 

ISa 9:19 Samuel replied to Saul, “I am the seer. Go up ahead of me to the high place. You must eat with me 
today. Tomorrow, when I let you go, I shall tell you whatever is on your mind. 

ISa 9:20 As regards your donkeys, however, which strayed three days ago, do not worry about them; they have 
been found. And for whom is the whole wealth of Israel destined, if not for you and for all the members of your 
father’s family?”. 

ISa 9:21 To this, Saul replied, “Am I not a Benjaminite, from the smallest of the tribes of Israel? And is not my 
family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? Why are you saying a thing like this to me?”. 

1 Sa 9:22 Samuel then took Saul and his servant and brought them into the hall and gave them a place at the 
head of the guests, of whom there were about thirty. 

ISa 9:23 Samuel then said to the cook, “Serve the portion which I gave you and told you to put on one side”. 

ISa 9:24 The cook then picked up the leg and the tail and put it in front of Saul, saying, “This is for you. This is 
what was left. Make a good meal . . ”. That day, Saul ate with Samuel. 

1 Sa 9:25 They came down from the high place into the town. A bed was made for Saul on the roof and he lay 
down there. 

ISa 9:26 At dawn, Samuel called to Saul on the roof, “Get up, and I shall send you on your way”. Saul got up, 
and Samuel and he went outside together. 

1 Sa 9:27 They had walked as far as the end of the town when Samuel said to Saul, “Tell the servant to go on 
ahead of us, but you stand still for a moment, so that I can make known to you the word of God”. 

ISa 10:1 Samuel took a phial of oil and poured it on Saul’s head; he then kissed him and said, “Has not Yahweh 
anointed you as leader of his people Israel? You are the man who is to govern Yahweh’s people and save them 
from the power of the enemies surrounding them. The sign for you that Yahweh has anointed you as prince of 
his heritage is this: 

1 Sa 1 0:2 after leaving me today, you will meet two men near the tomb of Rachel, on the frontier of Benjamin … 
and they will say to you, ‘The donkeys which you went looking for have been found, and your father has lost 
interest in the matter of the donkeys and is worrying about you and wondering, What am I to do about my son?’. 
ISa 10:3 Going on from there, you will come to the Oak of Tabor, where you will meet three men going up to 
God at Bethel; one will be carrying three kids, one three loaves of bread and the third a skin of wine. 

1 Sa 1 0:4 They will greet you and give you two loaves of bread which you must accept from them. 

ISa 10:5 After this, you will come to Gibeah of God (where the Philistine garrison is) and, when you are just 
outside the town, you will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place, headed by lyre, 
tambourine, pipe and harp; they will be in a state of ecstasy. 



1 Sa 1 0:6 The spirit of Yahweh will then seize on you, and you will go into ecstasy with them, and be changed 
into another man. 

ISa 10:7 When these signs have occurred, act as occasion serves, for God is with you. 

ISa 10:8 You will then go down, ahead of me, to Gilgal, and I shall join you there to make burnt offerings and to 
offer communion sacrifices. You must wait seven days for me to come to you, and I shall then reveal to you what 
you must do”. 

ISa 10:9 As soon as he had turned his back to leave Samuel, God changed his heart. And all these signs 
occurred that very day … 

ISa 10:10 From there, they came to Gibeah: and there was a group of prophets coming to meet him! The spirit 
of God seized on him and he fell into ecstasy with them. 

ISa 10:11 Seeing him prophesying with the prophets, all the people who had known him previously said to one 
another, “What has come over the son of Kish? Is Saul one of the prophets too?”. 

ISa 10:12 And one of the local people retorted, “But who is their father?”. Hence the origin of the proverb: Is Saul 
one of the prophets too? 

ISa 10:13 When he came out of his ecstasy, he went into Gibeah. 

ISa 10:14 Saul’s uncle asked him and his servant, “Where have you been?”. “Looking for the donkeys”, he 
replied, “and when we could not find them anywhere, we went to Samuel”. 

ISa 10:15 Saul’s uncle said, “Tell me please what Samuel said to you”. 

ISa 10:16 Saul said to his uncle, “He merely told us that the donkeys were already found”, but did not mention 
anything that Samuel had said about the kingship. 

ISa 10:17 Samuel summoned the people to Yahweh at Mizpah 

ISa 10:18 and said to the Israelites, “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘I brought Israel out of Egypt and 
delivered you from the power of the Egyptians and of all the kingdoms that were oppressing you’. 

ISa 10:19 But today you have rejected your God, him who saves you from all your difficulties and troubles; and 
you have said, ‘No, you must set a king over us’. Very well, take your positions before Yahweh, tribe by tribe 
and clan by clan”. 

ISa 10:20 Samuel then made all the tribes of Israel come forward, and the lot indicated the tribe of Benjamin. 
ISa 10:21 He then made the tribe of Benjamin come forward clan by clan, and the lot indicated the clan of 
Matri; he then made the clan of Matri come forward one by one, and the lot indicated Saul son of Kish, but when 
they looked for him, he was not to be found. 

ISa 10:22 Again they consulted Yahweh, “Has the man come here?”. Yahweh replied, “There he is, hiding 
among the baggage”. 

ISa 10:23 So they ran and fetched him out and, as he stood among the people, he was head and shoulders 
taller than any of them. 

ISa 10:24 Samuel then said to all the people, “You have seen the man whom Yahweh has chosen, and that 
among the whole people he has no equal”. And all the people acclaimed him, shouting, “Long live the king!”. 

ISa 10:25 Samuel then explained the king’s constitutional position to the people and inscribed this in a book 
which he placed before Yahweh. Samuel then sent all the people away, everyone back to his home. 

ISa 10:26 Saul too went home to Gibeah and with him went those strong men whose hearts God had touched. 
ISa 10:27 But there were some scoundrels who said, “How can this fellow save us?”. These treated him with 
contempt and offered him no present. 

ISa 11:1 About a month later, Nahash the Ammonite marched up and laid siege to Jabesh in Gilead. All the 
men of Jabesh said to Nahash, “Make a treaty with us and we will be your subjects”. 

ISa 1 1 :2 Nahash the Ammonite replied, “I shall make a treaty with you only on this condition, that I put out all 
your right eyes, and I will make it a taunt to the whole of Israel”. 

ISa 11:3 The elders of Jabesh said to him, “Give us seven days’ grace while we send messengers throughout 
the territory of Israel, and if no one comes to our help, we will come out to you”. 

ISa 1 1 :4 The messengers came to Gibeah of Saul, and reported this to the people, and all the people wept 
aloud. 

ISa 11:5 Now Saul was just then coming in from the fields behind his oxen, and he said, “What is wrong? Why 
are the people weeping?”. They explained to him what the men of Jabesh had said. 

ISa 11:6 And the spirit of Yahweh seized on Saul when he heard these words, and he fell into a fury. 

1 Sa 1 1 :7 He took a yoke of oxen, cut them into pieces and sent these by messengers throughout the territory of 
Israel with these words, “Anyone who will not march with Saul will have the same done to his oxen!”. At this, a 
panic from Yahweh swept on the people and they marched out as one man. 

ISa 11:8 Saul inspected them at Bezek; there were three hundred thousand of Israel and thirty thousand of 
Judah. 

ISa 11:9 Then he said to the messengers who had come, “This is what you are to say to the people of Jabesh 
in Gilead, ‘Tomorrow, by the time that the sun is hot, help will reach you’”. The messengers went and reported 



this to the people of Jabesh who were overjoyed; 

ISa 11:10 they said to Nahash, Tomorrow we shall come out to you and you can do whatever you like to us”. 
ISa 11:11 The next day, Saul disposed the army in three contingents, which burst into the middle of the camp 
during the dawn watch and slaughtered the Ammonites until high noon. The survivors were so scattered that no 
two of them were left together. 

ISa 11:12 The people then said to Samuel, “Who said, ‘Must we have Saul reigning over us?’. Hand the men 
over, for us to put them to death”. 

ISa 11:13 “No one must be put to death today”, Saul said, “for today Yahweh has intervened to rescue Israel”. 
ISa 11:14 Samuel then said to the people, “Let us now go to Gilgal and reaffirm the monarchy there”. 

ISa 11:15 The people then all went to Gilgal. And there, at Gilgal, they proclaimed Saul king before Yahweh; 
they offered communion sacrifices before Yahweh, and there Saul and all the people of Israel gave themselves 
over to great rejoicing. 

ISa 12:1 Samuel said to all Israel, “I have faithfully done all that you asked of me, and have appointed you a 
king. 

ISa 12:2 In future, the king will lead you. As for me, I am old and grey, and in any case you have my sons. I 
have been your leader ever since I was young until today. 

ISa 12:3 Here I am. Bear witness against me before Yahweh and before his anointed. Whose ox have I taken? 
Whose donkey have I taken? Have I wronged or oppressed anyone? Have I taken a consideration from anyone 
for looking the other way? If so, I will make amends”. 

ISa 12:4 They said, “You have neither wronged nor oppressed us nor accepted anything from anyone”. 

1 Sa 1 2:5 He said to them, “Yahweh is your witness and his anointed is witness today that you have found 
nothing in my hands?”. They replied, “He is witness”. 

ISa 12:6 Samuel then said to the people, “Yahweh is witness, he who raised up Moses and Aaron and who 
brought your ancestors out of Egypt. 

1 Sa 1 2:7 So now, stay where you are, while I plead with you before Yahweh and remind you of all the saving 
acts which he has done for you and for your ancestors. 

ISa 12:8 After Jacob had arrived in Egypt, the Egyptians oppressed them, and your ancestors cried to Yahweh. 
Yahweh then sent Moses and Aaron, who brought your ancestors out of Egypt and gave them a settled home 
here. 

ISa 12:9 They then forgot Yahweh their God and he sold them into the power of Sisera, general of the army of 
Hazor, and also into the power of the Philistines and of the king of Moab, who made war on them. 

ISa 12:10 They cried to Yahweh, ‘We have sinned’, they said, ‘for we have deserted Yahweh and served the 
Baals and the Astartes. Rescue us now from the power of our enemies, and we will serve you’. 

ISa 12:11 Yahweh then sent Jerubbaal, Barak, Jephthah, and Samuel. He rescued you from the power of the 
enemies surrounding you, and you lived in security. 

ISa 12:12 “But when you saw Nahash, king of the Ammonites, marching on you, you said to me, ‘No, we must 
have a king to rule us’ — although Yahweh your God is your king. 

ISa 12:13 So, here is the king whom you have chosen; Yahweh has appointed you a king. 

1 Sa 1 2: 1 4 If you fear and serve Yahweh and obey his voice and do not rebel against his commands, and if both 
you and the king who rules you follow Yahweh your God, all will be well. 

1 Sa 1 2: 1 5 But if you do not obey Yahweh’s voice but rebel against his commands, Yahweh’s hand will be 
against you and against your king. 

ISa 12:16 “Stay where you are and see the wonder which Yahweh will do before your eyes. 

ISa 12:17 Is it not now the wheat harvest? I shall call on Yahweh and he will send thunder and rain, so that you 
may clearly understand what a very wicked thing you have done, in Yahweh’s eyes, by asking for a king”. 

ISa 12:18 Samuel then called on Yahweh, and Yahweh sent thunder and rain the same day, and all the people 
held Yahweh and Samuel in great awe. 

ISa 12:19 They all said to Samuel, “Pray for your servants to Yahweh your God, to save us from death; for to all 
our sins we have added this wrong of asking for a king”. 

ISa 12:20 Samuel said to the people, “Do not be afraid. Although you have done all these wicked things, do not 
withdraw your allegiance from Yahweh. Instead, serve Yahweh with all your heart. 

ISa 12:21 Do not transfer your allegiance to useless idols which, being useless, are futile and cannot save 
anybody; 

ISa 12:22 Yahweh, for the sake of his great name, will not desert his people, for it has pleased Yahweh to 
make you his people. 

ISa 12:23 For my part, far be it from me to sin against Yahweh by ceasing to pray for you or to instruct you in 
the good and right way. 

ISa 12:24 Fear none but Yahweh, and serve him faithfully with all your heart, bearing in mind the wonder which 
he has just performed. But, if you persist in wickedness, you and your king will perish”. 



ISa 13:1 Saul was … years old when he became king, and reigned over Israel for … years. 

ISa 13:2 Saul selected three thousand men of Israel; two thousand of them were with Saul at Michmash and in 
the highlands of Bethel, and one thousand with Jonathan at Geba of Benjamin; the rest of the people Saul sent 
home, everyone to his tent. 

ISa 13:3 Jonathan killed the Philistine governor stationed at Gibeah and the Philistines were informed that the 
Hebrews had risen in revolt. Saul had the trumpet sounded throughout the country, 

ISa 13:4 and all Israel heard the news, “Saul has killed the Philistine governor, and now Israel has antagonised 
the Philistines”. So all the people rallied behind Saul at Gilgal. 

ISa 13:5 The Philistines mustered to make war on Israel, three thousand chariots, six thousand horse and a 
force as numerous as the sand on the seashore. They came up and pitched camp at Michmash, to the east of 
Beth-Aven. 

ISa 13:6 When the Israelites saw that their plight was desperate, being so hard pressed, the people hid in 
caves, in holes, in crevices, in vaults, in wells. 

ISa 13:7 Some also crossed the Jordan fords into the territory of Gad and Gilead. Saul was still at Gilgal and all 
the people who followed him were trembling. 

ISa 13:8 He waited for seven days, the period fixed by Samuel, but Samuel did not come to Gilgal, and the 
army, deserting Saul, began dispersing. 

ISa 13:9 Saul then said, “Bring me the burnt offering and the communion sacrifices”. And he presented the burnt 
offering. 

ISa 13:10 Just as he had finished presenting the burnt offering, Samuel arrived, and Saul went out to meet and 
greet him. 

ISa 13:11 Samuel said, “What have you been doing?”. Saul replied, “I saw the army deserting me and 
dispersing, and you had not come at the time fixed, while the Philistines were mustering at Michmash. 

ISa 13:12 Sol thought: Now the Philistines are going to fall on me at Gilgal and I have not implored the favour 
of Yahweh. So I felt obliged to make the burnt offering myself”. 

ISa 13:13 Samuel said to Saul, “You have acted like a fool. You have not obeyed the order which Yahweh your 
God gave you. Otherwise, Yahweh would have confirmed your sovereignty over Israel for ever. 

ISa 13:14 But now your sovereignty will not last; Yahweh has discovered a man after his own heart and 
designated him as leader of his people, since you have not carried out what Yahweh ordered you”. 

ISa 13:15 Samuel then got up and left Gilgal to continue his journey. Those people remaining followed Saul as 
he went to join the warriors, and went from Gilgal to Geba of Benjamin. Saul reviewed the force that was with 
him; there were about six hundred men. 

ISa 13:16 Saul, his son Jonathan, and the force that was with them took up their quarters in Geba of Benjamin 
while the Philistines camped at Michmash. 

ISa 13:17 The raiding company sallied out of the Philistine camp in three groups: one group made for Ophrah 
in the territory of Shual; 

ISa 13:18 one group made for Beth-Horon; and one group made for the high ground overlooking the Valley of 
the Hyenas, in the direction of the desert. 

ISa 13:19 There was not a single blacksmith throughout the territory of Israel, the Philistines’ reasoning being, 
“We do not want the Hebrews making swords or spears”. 

1 Sa 1 3:20 Hence, the Israelites were all in the habit of going down individually to the Philistines to sharpen their 
ploughshares, axes, mattocks and scythes. 

1 Sa 1 3:21 The price was two-thirds of a shekel for ploughshares and axes, and one-third for sharpening 
mattocks and straightening goads. 

1 Sa 1 3:22 So it was that on the day of the battle, no one in the army with Saul and Jonathan was equipped with 
either sword or spear; only Saul and his son Jonathan were so equipped. 

1 Sa 1 3:23 A Philistine unit set out for the Pass of Michmash. 

ISa 14:1 One day, Jonathan son of Saul said to his armour-bearer, “Come on, let us go across to the Philistine 
outpost over on the other side”. But he did not inform his father. 

ISa 14:2 Saul was on the outskirts of Geba, sitting under the pomegranate tree that stands near the threshing- 
floor; the force with him numbered about six hundred men. 

ISa 14:3 Ahijah son of Ahitub, brother of Ichabod, son of Phinehas, son of Eli, the priest of Yahweh at Shiloh, 
was carrying the ephod. The force did not know that Jonathan had left. 

ISa 14:4 In the pass that Jonathan was trying to cross to reach the Philistine outpost, there is a rocky spur on 
one side and a rocky spur on the other; one is called Bozez, the other Seneh. 

ISa 14:5 The first spur stands to the north facing Michmash, the other to the south facing Geba. 

ISa 14:6 Jonathan said to his armour-bearer, “Come on, let us go across to these uncircumcised people’s 
outpost; perhaps Yahweh will do something for us, for Yahweh is free to grant deliverance through a few men, 
just as much as through many”. 



ISa 14:7 His armour-bearer replied, “Do exactly as you think. I am with you; our hearts are as one”. 

ISa 14:8 Jonathan then said, “Look, we will go across to these people and let ourselves be seen. 

ISa 14:9 If they say, ‘Do not move until we come to you’, we shall stay where we are and not go up to them. 

1 Sa 1 4: 1 0 But if they say, ‘Come up to us’, we shall go up, for that will be the sign for us that Yahweh has given 
them into our power”. 

ISa 14:11 When the two of them let themselves be seen by the Philistine outpost, the Philistines said, “Look, 
the Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they have been hiding”. 

ISa 14:12 The men of the outpost then hailed Jonathan and his armour-bearer. “Come up to us”, they said, “we 
have something to tell you”. Jonathan then said to his armour-bearer, “Follow me up; Yahweh has given them 
into the power of Israel”. 

ISa 14:13 Jonathan clambered up on hands and feet, with his armour-bearer behind him; the Philistines fell at 
Jonathan’s onslaught, and his armour-bearer, coming behind, finished them off. 

ISa 14:14 This first killing made by Jonathan and his armour-bearer accounted for about twenty men … 

ISa 14:15 There was panic in the camp, in the field and throughout the army; outpost and raiding company too 
were panic-stricken; the earth quaked: it was a panic from Yahweh. 

ISa 14:16 Saul’s look-out men in Geba of Benjamin could see the camp scattering in all directions. 

ISa 14:17 Saul then said to the force that was with him, “Call the roll and see who has left us”. So they called 
the roll, and Jonathan and his armour-bearer were missing. 

ISa 14:18 Saul then said to Ahijah, “Bring the ephod”, since he was the man who carried the ephod in Israel. 

ISa 14:19 But while Saul was speaking to the priest, the turmoil in the Philistine camp grew worse and worse; 
and Saul said to the priest, “Withdraw your hand”. 

ISa 14:20 Saul and the whole force with him then formed up and advanced to where the fighting was going on: 
and there they all were, drawing their swords on one another in wild confusion. 

ISa 14:21 Those Hebrews who had earlier taken service with the Philistines and had accompanied them into 
camp, now defected to the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan. 

ISa 14:22 Similarly, all those Israelites who had been hiding in the highlands of Ephraim, hearing that the 
Philistines were on the run, chased after them and joined in the fight. 

ISa 14:23 That day Yahweh gave Israel the victory. The fighting reached the other side of Beth-Horon. 

ISa 14:24 As the men of Israel were hard pressed that day, Saul pronounced this imprecation over the people, 
“A curse on anyone who eats food before evening, before I have taken revenge on my enemies!”. So none of the 
people so much as tasted food. 

ISa 14:25 Now there was a honeycomb out in the open. 

ISa 14:26 The people came to the honeycomb, the honey was dripping out, but no one put a hand to his mouth, 
the people being in awe of the oath. 

ISa 14:27 Jonathan, however, not having heard his father bind the people with the oath, reached with the end 
of the stick which he was carrying, thrust it into the honeycomb and put it to his mouth; whereupon his eyes grew 
brighter. 

ISa 14:28 One of the people then spoke up. “Your father”, he said, “has bound the people with this oath: ‘A 
curse on anyone who eats anything today’”. 

ISa 14:29 “My father has brought trouble on the country”, Jonathan replied. “See how much brighter my eyes are 
for having eaten this mouthful of honey. 

ISa 14:30 By the same token, if the people had been allowed to eat some of the booty which they had captured 
from the enemy today, would not the defeat of the Philistines have been all the greater?”. 

ISa 14:31 That day the Philistines were beaten from Michmash all the way to Aijalon, until the people were 
utterly exhausted. 

ISa 14:32 The people flung themselves on the booty and, taking sheep, bullocks and calves, slaughtered them 
there on the ground and ate them with the blood. 

ISa 14:33 Saul was informed, “The people are sinning against Yahweh by eating with the blood!”. He said, “You 
have not kept faith! Roll me a large stone here!”. 

ISa 14:34 Saul then said, “Scatter among the people and say, ‘Everyone is to bring his bullock or his sheep to 
me here’. You will slaughter them here and eat, and not sin against Yahweh by eating with the blood”. Each 
individual brought what he happened to have that night, and they all slaughtered in the same place. 

ISa 14:35 Saul built an altar to Yahweh; it was the first altar he had built to Yahweh. 

ISa 14:36 Saul said, “Let us go down under cover of dark and plunder the Philistines until dawn; we shall not 
leave one of them alive”. “Do whatever you think right”, they replied. But the priest said, “Let us approach God 
here”. 

ISa 14:37 Saul consulted God, “Shall I go down and pursue the Philistines? Will you hand them over to Israel?”. 
But he gave him no reply that day. 

ISa 14:38 Saul then said, “Come forward, all you leaders of the people; consider carefully where today’s sin 



may lie; 

ISa 14:39 for as Yahweh lives who gives victory to Israel, even if the sin lies with Jonathan my son, he shall be 
put to death”. But not one out of all the people answered. 

ISa 14:40 He then said to all Israel, “Stand on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will stand on the other”. And 
the people replied to Saul, “Do as you think right”. 

ISa 14:41 Saul then said, “Yahweh, God of Israel, why did you not answer your servant today? Yahweh, God of 
Israel, if the fault lies with me or with my son Jonathan, give urim: if the fault lies with your people Israel, give 
thummim”. Jonathan and Saul were indicated and the people went free. 

ISa 14:42 Saul said, “Cast the lot between me and my son Jonathan”, and Jonathan was indicated. 

ISa 14:43 “I only tasted a mouthful of honey off the end of the stick which I was carrying. But I am ready to die”. 
ISa 14:44 Saul said, “May God bring unnameable ills on me, and worse ones too, if you do not die, Jonathan!”. 
ISa 14:45 But the people said to Saul, “Must Jonathan die after winning this great victory for Israel? We will 
never allow that! As Yahweh lives, not one hair of his head shall fall to the ground, for his deeds today have 
been done with the help of God”. And so the people ransomed Jonathan and he was not put to death. 

ISa 14:46 Saul decided not to pursue the Philistines, and the Philistines retired to their own territory. 

ISa 14:47 Saul consolidated his rule over Israel and made war on all his enemies on all fronts: on Moab, the 
Ammonites, Edom, the king of Zobah and the Philistines; whichever way he turned, he was victorious. 

ISa 14:48 He did great deeds of valour; he defeated the Amalekites and delivered Israel from those who used 
to pillage him. 

ISa 14:49 Saul’s sons were: Jonathan, Ishvi and Malchishua. The names of his two daughters were: the elder, 
Merab, and the younger, Michal. 

ISa 1 4:50 The name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam daughter of Ahimaaz. The name of his army commander was 
Abner son of Ner, Saul’s uncle. 

ISa 14:51 Kish father of Saul, and Ner father of Abner were the sons of Abiel. 

ISa 14:52 There was fierce warfare with the Philistines throughout Saul’s life. Any strong or valiant man who 
caught Saul’s eye, he recruited into his service. 

ISa 15:1 Samuel said to Saul, “I am the man whom Yahweh sent to anoint you as king of his people Israel, so 
now listen to the words of Yahweh. 

ISa 15:2 This is what Yahweh Sabaoth says, ‘I intend to punish what Amalek did to Israel — laying a trap for 
him on the way as he was coming up from Egypt. 

ISa 15:3 Now, go and crush Amalek; put him under the curse of destruction with all that he possesses. Do not 
spare him, but kill man and woman, babe and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and donkey’”. 

ISa 15:4 Saul summoned the people and reviewed them at Telaim: two hundred thousand foot soldiers (and 
ten thousand men of Judah). 

ISa 15:5 Saul advanced on the town of Amalek and lay in ambush in the river bed. 

ISa 15:6 Saul said to the Kenites, “Go away, leave your homes among the Amalekites, in case I destroy you 
with them — you acted with faithful love towards all the Israelites when they were coming up from Egypt”. So the 
Kenites moved away from the Amalekites. 

ISa 15:7 Saul then crushed the Amalekites, beginning at Havilah in the direction of Shur, which is to the east of 
Egypt. 

ISa 15:8 He took Agag king of the Amalekites alive and, executing the curse of destruction, put all the people to 
the sword. 

1 Sa 1 5:9 But Saul and the army spared Agag with the best of the sheep and cattle, the fatlings and lambs and 
all that was good. They did not want to consign these to the curse of destruction; they consigned only what was 
poor and worthless. 

ISa 15:10 The word of Yahweh came to Samuel, 

ISa 15:11 “I regret having made Saul king, since he has broken his allegiance to me and not carried out my 
orders”. Samuel was appalled and cried to Yahweh all night long. 

ISa 15:12 In the morning, Samuel set off to find Saul. Samuel was told, “Saul has been to Carmel, to raise 
himself a monument there, but now has turned about, moved on and gone down to Gilgal”. 

ISa 15:13 When Samuel reached Saul, Saul said, “May you be blessed by Yahweh! I have carried out 
Yahweh’s orders”. 

ISa 15:14 Samuel replied, “Then what is this bleating of sheep in my ears and the lowing of cattle that I hear?”. 
ISa 15:15 Saul said, “They have been brought from Amalek, the people having spared the best of the sheep 
and cattle to sacrifice them to Yahweh, your God; the rest we have consigned to the curse of destruction”. 

ISa 15:16 Samuel then said to Saul, “Stop! Let me tell you what Yahweh said to me last night”. He said, “Go on”. 
ISa 15:17 Samuel said, “Small as you may be in your own eyes, are you not the leader of the tribes of Israel? 
Yahweh has anointed you as king of Israel. 

ISa 15:18 When Yahweh sent you on a mission he said to you, ‘Go and put those sinners, the Amalekites, 



under the curse of destruction and make war on them until they are exterminated’. 

ISa 15:19 Why then did you not obey Yahweh’s voice? Why did you fall on the booty and do what is wrong in 
Yahweh’s eyes?”. 

ISa 15:20 Saul replied to Samuel, “But I did obey Yahweh’s voice. I went on the mission which Yahweh gave 
me; I brought back Agag king of the Amalekites; I put Amalek under the curse of destruction; 

ISa 15:21 and from the booty the people have taken the best sheep and cattle of what was under the curse of 
destruction only to sacrifice them to Yahweh your God in Gilgal”. 

ISa 15:22 To which, Samuel said: Is Yahweh pleased by burnt offerings and sacrifices or by obedience to 
Yahweh’s voice? Truly, obedience is better than sacrifice, submissiveness than the fat of rams. 

1 Sa 1 5:23 Rebellion is a sin of sorcery, presumption a crime of idolatry! “Since you have rejected Yahweh’s 
word, he has rejected you as king”. 

ISa 15:24 Saul then said to Samuel, “I have sinned, having broken Yahweh’s order and your instructions 
because I was afraid of the people and yielded to their demands. 

ISa 15:25 Now, please forgive my sin and come back with me, so that I can worship Yahweh”. 

ISa 15:26 Samuel said to Saul, “I will not come back with you, since you have rejected Yahweh’s word and 
Yahweh has rejected you as king of Israel”. 

1 Sa 1 5:27 As Samuel turned away to leave, Saul caught at the hem of his cloak and it tore, 

ISa 15:28 and Samuel said to him, “Today Yahweh has torn the kingdom of Israel from you and given it to a 
neighbour of yours who is better than you”. 

1 Sa 1 5:29 (The Glory of Israel, however, does not lie or go back on his word, not being human and liable to go 
back on his word.) 

ISa 15:30 “I have sinned”, Saul said, “but please still show me respect in front of my people’s elders and in front 
of Israel, and come back with me, so that I can worship Yahweh your God”. 

ISa 15:31 Samuel followed Saul back and Saul worshipped Yahweh. 

ISa 15:32 Samuel then said, “Bring me Agag king of the Amalekites!”. Agag came towards him unsteadily 
saying, “Truly death is bitter!”. 

ISa 15:33 Samuel said: As your sword has left women childless, so will your mother be left childless among 
women! Samuel then butchered Agag before Yahweh at Gilgal. 

ISa 15:34 Samuel left for Ramah, and Saul went up home to Gibeah of Saul. 

ISa 15:35 Samuel did not see Saul again till his dying day. Samuel indeed mourned over Saul, but Yahweh 
regretted having made Saul king of Israel. 

ISa 16:1 Yahweh said to Samuel, “How much longer do you mean to go on mourning over Saul, now that I 
myself have rejected him as ruler of Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go. I am sending you to Jesse of 
Bethlehem, for I have found myself a king from among his sons”. 

ISa 16:2 Samuel replied, “How can I go? When Saul hears of it he will kill me”. Yahweh then said, “Take a heifer 
with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to Yahweh’. 

1 Sa 1 6:3 Invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I shall reveal to you what you must do; and you will anoint for me the 
one I indicate to you”. 

1 Sa 1 6:4 Samuel did what Yahweh ordered and went to Bethlehem. The elders of the town came trembling to 
meet him and asked, “Seer, is your coming favourable for us”, 

ISa 16:5 “Yes”, he replied. “I have come to sacrifice to Yahweh. Purify yourselves and come with me to the 
sacrifice”. He purified Jesse and his sons and invited them to the sacrifice. 

ISa 16:6 When they arrived, he looked at Eliab and thought, “This must be Yahweh’s anointed now before him”, 
ISa 16:7 but Yahweh said to Samuel, “Take no notice of his appearance or his height, for I have rejected him; 
God does not see as human beings see; they look at appearances but Yahweh looks at the heart”. 

ISa 16:8 Jesse then called Abinadab and presented him to Samuel, who said, “Yahweh has not chosen this one 
either”. 

ISa 16:9 Jesse then presented Shammah, but Samuel said, “Yahweh has not chosen this one either”. 

ISa 16:10 Jesse thus presented seven of his sons to Samuel, but Samuel said to Jesse, “Yahweh has not 
chosen these”. 

ISa 16:11 He then asked Jesse, “Are these all the sons you have?”. Jesse replied, “There is still one left, the 
youngest; he is looking after the sheep”. Samuel then said to Jesse, “Send for him, for we shall not sit down to 
eat until he arrives”. 

ISa 16:12 Jesse had him sent for; he had ruddy cheeks, with fine eyes and an attractive appearance. Yahweh 
said, “Get up and anoint him: he is the one!”. 

1 Sa 1 6: 1 3 At this, Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him, surrounded by his brothers; and the spirit of 
Yahweh seized on David from that day onwards. Samuel, for his part, set off and went to Ramah. 

ISa 16:14 Now the spirit of Yahweh had withdrawn from Saul, and an evil spirit from Yahweh afflicted him with 
terrors. 



1 Sa 16:15 Saul’s servants said to him, “An evil spirit from God is undoubtedly the cause of your terrors. 

ISa 16:16 Let our lord give the order, and your servants who wait on you will look for a skilled harpist; when the 
evil spirit from God comes over you, he will play and it will do you good”. 

ISa 16:17 Saul said to his attendants, “Find me, please, a man who plays well, and bring him to me”. 

ISa 16:18 One of the servants then spoke up and said, “I have seen one of the sons of Jesse the Bethlehemite: 
he is a skilled player, a brave man and a fighter, well spoken, good-looking and Yahweh is with him”. 

ISa 16:19 So Saul sent messengers to Jesse with the order, “Send me your son David (who is with the sheep)”. 

1 Sa 1 6:20 Jesse took five loaves, a skin of wine and a kid, and sent them to Saul by his son David. 

ISa 16:21 David went to Saul and entered his service; Saul became very fond of him and David became his 
armour-bearer. 

ISa 16:22 Saul then sent a message to Jesse, “Let David stay in my service, since he has won my favour”. 

1 Sa 1 6:23 And whenever the spirit from God came over Saul, David would take a harp and play; Saul would 
then be soothed; it would do him good, and the evil spirit would leave him. 

ISa 17:1 The Philistines mustered their troops for war; they assembled at Socoh in Judah and pitched camp 
between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-Dammim. 

ISa 17:2 Saul and the Israelites also mustered, pitching camp in the Valley of the Terebinth, and drew up their 
battle-line opposite the Philistines. 

ISa 17:3 The Philistines occupied the high ground on one side and the Israelites occupied the high ground on 
the other side, with the valley between them. 

ISa 17:4 A champion stepped out from the Philistine ranks; his name was Goliath, from Gath; he was six cubits 
and one span tall. 

ISa 17:5 On his head was a bronze helmet and he wore a breastplate of scale-armour; the breastplate weighed 
five thousand shekels of bronze. 

ISa 17:6 He had bronze greaves on his legs and a bronze scimitar slung across his shoulders. 

ISa 17:7 The shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s beam, and the head of his spear weighed six hundred 
shekels of iron. A shield-bearer walked in front of him. 

ISa 17:8 Taking position in front of the Israelite lines, he shouted, “Why have you come out to range yourselves 
for battle? Am I not a Philistine and are you not Saul’s lackeys? Choose a man and let him come down to me. 
ISa 17:9 If he can fight it out with me and kill me, we will be your servants; but if I can beat him and kill him, you 
become our servants and serve us”. 

ISa 17:10 The Philistine then said, “I challenge the ranks of Israel today. Give me a man and we will fight it out!”. 
ISa 17:11 When Saul and all Israel heard what the Philistine said, they were dismayed and terrified. 

ISa 17:12 David was the son of an Ephrathite from Bethlehem of Judah whose name was Jesse; Jesse had 
eight sons and, by Saul’s time, he was old and well on in years. 

ISa 17:13 Jesse’s eldest three sons followed Saul to the war. The names of the three sons who went to the war 
were: the eldest Eliab, the second Abinadab and the third Shammah. 

ISa 17:14 David was the youngest; the eldest three followed Saul. 

ISa 17:15 David alternated between serving Saul and looking after his father’s sheep at Bethlehem. 

ISa 17:16 Morning and evening, the Philistine advanced, presenting himself thus for forty days. 

ISa 17:17 Jesse said to his son David, “Take your brothers this <i>ephah</i> of roasted grain and these ten loaves, 
and hurry to the camp, to your brothers. 

ISa 17:18 And take these ten cheeses to their commanding officer; find out how your brothers are and bring 
some token back from them; 

ISa 17:19 they are with Saul and all the men of Israel in the Valley of the Terebinth, fighting the Philistines”. 

ISa 17:20 David got up early in the morning and, leaving the sheep with someöne to guard them, took up his 
load and went off as Jesse had ordered; he reached the encampment just as the troops were leaving to take up 
battle stations and shouting the war cry. 

ISa 17:21 Israel and the Philistines drew up their lines facing one another. 

ISa 17:22 David left his bundle in charge of the baggage guard and, running to the battle-line, went and asked 
his brothers how they were. 

ISa 17:23 While he was talking to them, the champion (Goliath, the Philistine from Gath) came up from the 
Philistine ranks and made his usual speech, which David heard. 

ISa 17:24 As soon as the Israelites saw this man, they all ran away from him and were terrified. 

ISa 17:25 The Israelites said, “You saw that man who just came up? He comes to challenge Israel. The king will 
lavish riches on the man who kills him, he will give him his daughter in marriage and exempt his father’s family 
from all taxes in Israel”. 

ISa 17:26 David asked the men who were standing near him, “What would be the reward for killing this 
Philistine and saving Israel from disgrace? Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, to challenge the armies of the 
living God?”. 



ISa 17:27 The people told him what they had been saying, That would be the reward for killing him”, they said. 
ISa 17:28 His eldest brother Eliab heard David talking to the men and grew angry with him. “Why have you 
come down here?”. he said. “Whom have you left in charge of those few sheep in the desert? I know how 
impudent and artful you are; you have come to watch the battle!”. 

ISa 17:29 David retorted, “What have I done? May I not even speak?”. 

ISa 17:30 And he turned away from him to someöne else and asked the same question, to which the people 
replied as before. 

ISa 17:31 David’s words were noted, however, and reported to Saul, who sent for him. 

ISa 17:32 David said to Saul, “Let no one be discouraged on his account; your servant will go and fight this 
Philistine”. 

ISa 17:33 Saul said to David, “You cannot go and fight the Philistine; you are only a boy and he has been a 
warrior since his youth”. 

ISa 17:34 David said to Saul, “Your servant used to look after the sheep for his father and whenever a lion or a 
bear came and took a sheep from the flock, 

ISa 17:35 I used to follow it up, lay into it and snatch the sheep out of its jaws. If it turned on me, I would seize it 
by the beard and batter it to death. 

ISa 17:36 Your servant has killed both lion and bear, and this uncircumcised Philistine will end up like one of 
them for having challenged the armies of the living God”. 

ISa 17:37 “Yahweh”, David went on, “who delivered me from the claws of lion and bear, will deliver me from the 
clutches of this Philistine”. Then Saul said to David, “Go, and Yahweh be with you!”. 

ISa 17:38 Saul dressed David in his own armour; he put a bronze helmet on his head, dressed him in a 
breastplate 

ISa 17:39 and buckled his own sword over David’s armour. David tried to walk but, not being used to them, said 
to Saul, “I cannot walk in these; I am not used to them”. So they took them off again. 

ISa 17:40 He took his stick in his hand, selected five smooth stones from the river bed and put them in his 
shepherd’s bag, in his pouch; then, sling in hand, he walked towards the Philistine. 

ISa 17:41 The Philistine, preceded by his shield-bearer, came nearer and nearer to David. 

ISa 17:42 When the Philistine looked David up and down, what he saw filled him with scorn, because David 
was only a lad, with ruddy cheeks and an attractive appearance. 

ISa 17:43 The Philistine said to David, “Am I a dog for you to come after me with sticks?”. And the Philistine 
cursed David by his gods. 

ISa 17:44 The Philistine said to David, “Come over here and I will give your flesh to the birds of the air and the 
wild beasts!”. 

ISa 17:45 David retorted to the Philistine, “You come to me with sword, spear and scimitar, but I come to you in 
the name of Yahweh Sabaoth, God of the armies of Israel, whom you have challenged. 

ISa 17:46 Today, Yahweh will deliver you into my hand; I shall kill you, I shall cut off your head; today, I shall 
give your corpse and the corpses of the Philistine army to the birds of the air and the wild beasts, so that the 
whole world may know that there is a God in Israel, 

ISa 17:47 and this whole assembly know that Yahweh does not give victory by means of sword and spear — for 
Yahweh is lord of the battle and he will deliver you into our power”. 

ISa 17:48 No sooner had the Philistine started forward to confront David than David darted out of the lines and 
ran to meet the Philistine. 

ISa 17:49 Putting his hand in his bag, he took out a stone, slung it and struck the Philistine on the forehead; the 
stone penetrated his forehead and he fell face downwards on the ground. 

ISa 17:50 Thus David triumphed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone; he hit the Philistine and killed him, 
though he had no sword in his hand. 

ISa 17:51 David ran and stood over the Philistine, seized his sword, pulled it from the scabbard, despatched 
him and cut off his head. When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled. 

ISa 17:52 The men of Israel and of Judah started forward, shouting their war cry, and pursued the Philistines as 
far as the approaches of Gath and the gates of Ekron. The Philistine dead lay all along the road from Shaaraim 
as far as Gath and Ekron. 

ISa 17:53 Turning back from their ferocious pursuit of the Philistines, the Israelites plundered their camp. 

ISa 17:54 And David took the Philistine’s head and brought it to Jerusalem; his weapons, however, he put in his 
own tent. 

ISa 17:55 When Saul saw David going to engage the Philistine he said to Abner, the army commander, “Abner, 
whose son is that boy?”. “On your life, O king”, Abner replied, “I do not know”. 

ISa 17:56 The king said, “Find out whose son the lad is”. 

ISa 17:57 When David came back after killing the Philistine, Abner took him and brought him before Saul with 
the Philistine’s head in his hand. 



ISa 17:58 Saul asked him, “Whose son are you, young man?”. David replied, “The son of your servant Jesse of 
Bethlehem”. 

ISa 18:1 When David had finished talking to Saul, Jonathan felt an instant affection for David; Jonathan loved 
him like his very self; 

ISa 18:2 Saul engaged him that very day and would not let him go home to his father. 

ISa 18:3 Jonathan made a pact with David, since he loved him like his very self; 

1 Sa 1 8:4 Jonathan took off the cloak which he was wearing and gave it to David, and his armour too, even 
including his sword, his bow and his belt. 

ISa 18:5 Wherever David was sent on a mission by Saul, he was successful, and Saul put him in command of 
the fighting men; all the people respected him and so did Saul’s staff. 

1 Sa 1 8:6 On their return, when David was coming back from killing the Philistine, the women came out of all the 
towns of Israel singing and dancing to meet King Saul, with tambourines, sistrums and cries of joy; 

1 Sa 1 8:7 and as they danced the women sang: Saul has killed his thousands, and David his tens of thousands. 
ISa 18:8 Saul was very angry; the incident displeased him. “They have given David the tens of thousands”, he 
said, “but me only the thousands; what more can he have, except the throne?”. 

ISa 18:9 And Saul watched David jealously from that day onwards. 

ISa 18:10 The following day, an evil spirit from God seized on Saul and he fell into a frenzy while he was 
indoors. David played the harp as on other occasions; Saul had a spear in his hand. 

ISa 18:11 Saul brandished the spear; he said, “I will pin David to the wall!”. David evaded him twice. 

ISa 18:12 Saul feared David, since Yahweh was with him and had withdrawn from Saul. 

ISa 18:13 So Saul removed him from his presence and appointed him commander of a thousand; he led the 
people on campaign. 

ISa 18:14 In all his expeditions, David was successful and Yahweh was with him. 

ISa 18:15 And Saul, seeing how very successful he was, was afraid of him. 

ISa 18:16 All Israel and Judah loved David, however, since he was their leader on campaign. 

ISa 18:17 Saul said to David, “This is my elder daughter Merab; I shall give her to you in marriage; but you must 
serve me bravely and fight Yahweh’s wars”. Saul thought, “Better than strike the blow myself, let the Philistines 
do it!”. 

ISa 18:18 David replied to Saul, “Who am I and what is my lineage — and my father’s family — in Israel, for me 
to become the king’s son-in-law?”. 

ISa 18:19 When the time came for Merab daughter of Saul to be given to David, she was given to Adriel of 
Meholah instead. 

ISa 18:20 Now Michal daughter of Saul fell in love with David. When Saul heard this he was pleased. 

1 Sa 1 8:21 He thought, “Yes, I shall give her to him; she can be the snare for him, so that the Philistines will get 

him”. (On two occasions, Saul told David, “Today, you shall be my son-in-law.') 

ISa 18:22 Saul gave instructions to his servants, “Have a private word with David and say, ‘Look, the king is 

fond of you and all his servants love you — why not be the king’s son-in-law?’”. 

ISa 18:23 Saul’s servants repeated these words in David’s ear, to which David replied, “Do you think that 
becoming the king’s son-in-law is a trivial matter; I have neither wealth nor position”. 

ISa 18:24 Saul’s servants then reported back, “This is what David said”. 

ISa 18:25 Saul replied, “Tell David this, ‘The king desires no bride-price except one hundred Philistine 
foreskins, in vengeance on the king’s enemies’”. Saul was counting on getting David killed by the Philistines. 

ISa 18:26 When his servants repeated this to David, David thought it would be a fine thing to be the king’s son- 
in-law. And no time was lost 

ISa 18:27 before David got up to go, he and his men, and killed two hundred of the Philistines. David brought 
their foreskins back and counted them out before the king, so that he could be the king’s son-in-law. Saul then 
gave him his daughter Michal in marriage. 

ISa 18:28 Saul could not but see that Yahweh was with David, and that the whole House of Israel loved him; 
ISa 18:29 Saul became more afraid of David than ever, and became his inveterate enemy. 

1 Sa 1 8:30 The Philistine chiefs kept mounting their campaigns but, whenever they did so, David proved more 
successful than any of Saul’s staff; consequently he gained great renown. 

ISa 19:1 Saul let his son Jonathan and all his servants know of his intention to kill David. But Jonathan, Saul’s 
son, held David in great affection; 

1 Sa 1 9:2 and Jonathan warned David, “My father Saul is looking for a way to kill you, so be on your guard 
tomorrow morning; go into hiding, stay out of sight. 

ISa 19:3 I shall go out and keep my father company in the countryside where you will be, and shall talk to my 
father about you; I shall see what the situation is and then tell you”. 

ISa 19:4 Jonathan spoke highly of David to Saul his father and said, “The king should not harm his servant 
David; far from harming you, what he has done has been greatly to your advantage. 



ISa 19:5 He took his life in his hands, he killed the Philistine, and Yahweh brought about a great victory for all 
Israel. You saw for yourself. How pleased you were! Why then sin against innocent blood by killing David for no 
reason?”. 

ISa 19:6 Saul was impressed by Jonathan’s words. Saul swore, “As Yahweh lives, I will not kill him”. 

ISa 19:7 Jonathan called David and told him all this. Jonathan then brought him to Saul, and David remained in 
attendance as before. 

1 Sa 1 9:8 War broke out again and David sallied out to fight the Philistines; he inflicted a great defeat on them 
and they fled before him. 

ISa 19:9 An evil spirit from Yahweh came over Saul while he was sitting in his house with his spear in his hand; 
David was playing the harp. 

ISa 19:10 Saul tried to pin David to the wall with his spear, but he avoided Saul’s thrust and the spear stuck in 
the wall. David fled and made good his escape. That same night 

ISa 19:11 Saul sent agents to watch David’s house, intending to kill him in the morning. But Michal, David’s 
wife, warned him, “If you do not escape tonight, you will be a dead man tomorrow!”. 

ISa 19:12 Michal then let David down through the window, and he made off, took to flight and so escaped. 

ISa 19:13 Michal then took a domestic image, laid it on the bed, put a tress of goats’ hair at the head of the bed 
and put a cover over it. 

ISa 19:14 When Saul sent the agents to arrest David, she said, “He is ill”. 

ISa 19:15 Saul sent the agents back to see David, with the words, “Bring him to me on his bed, for me to kill 
him!”. 

ISa 19:16 So in the agents went, and there in bed was the image, with the tress of goats’ hair on its head! 

ISa 19:17 Saul then said to Michal, “Why have you deceived me like this and let my enemy go, and so make his 
escape?”. Michal replied to Saul, “He said, ‘Let me go, or I shall kill you!’”. 

ISa 19:18 David, having fled and made his escape, went to Samuel at Ramah and told him exactly how Saul 
had treated him; he and Samuel went and lived in the huts. 

ISa 19:19 Word was brought to Saul, “David is in the huts at Ramah”. 

ISa 19:20 Saul accordingly sent agents to capture David; when they saw the community of prophets 
prophesying, and Samuel there as their leader, the spirit of God came over Saul’s agents, and they too fell into 
frenzy. 

ISa 19:21 When Saul was told of this, he sent other agents, and they too fell into frenzy; Saul then sent a third 
group of agents, and they fell into frenzy too. 

ISa 19:22 He then went to Ramah himself and, arriving at the large storage-well at Seku, asked, “Where are 
Samuel and David?”. And someöne said, “Why, they are in the huts at Ramah!”. 

ISa 19:23 Making his way from there to the huts at Ramah, the spirit of God came over him too, and he went 
along in a frenzy until he arrived at the huts at Ramah. 

ISa 19:24 He too stripped off his clothes and he too fell into a frenzy in Samuel’s presence, then collapsed 
naked on the ground for the rest of that day and all night. Hence the saying: Is Saul one of the prophets too? 

ISa 20:1 Fleeing from the huts at Ramah, David went and confronted Jonathan, “What have I done, what is my 
guilt, how have I wronged your father, for him to want to take my life?”. 

ISa 20:2 He replied, “You must not think that! You are not going to die. My father, you see, does nothing, 
important or unimportant, without confiding in me, so why should my father hide this from me? It is not true”. 

1 Sa 20:3 In reply, David swore, “Your father knows very well that I enjoy your favour, and thinks, ‘Jonathan 
must not know about this or he will be upset’. But, as Yahweh lives and as you yourself live, there is only a step 
between me and death”. 

1 Sa 20:4 At which, Jonathan said to David, “Whatever you think best, I will certainly do for you”. 

1 Sa 20:5 David replied, “Look, tomorrow is New Moon and I ought to sit at table with the king, but you must let 
me go and hide in the countryside until the evening. 

ISa 20:6 If your father notices my absence, you must say, ‘David insistently asked me for permission to hurry 
over to Bethlehem, his home town, because they are holding the annual sacrifice there for the whole clan’. 

ISa 20:7 If he says, ‘Very well’, your servant is safe, but if he flies into a rage, you may be sure that he has 
some evil plan. 

ISa 20:8 Show your servant faithful love, since you have bound your servant to you by a pact in Yahweh’s 
name. But if I am guilty, then kill me yourself — why take me to your father?”. 

1 Sa 20:9 Jonathan replied, “Perish the thought! If I knew for sure that my father was determined to do you a 
mischief, would I not have told you?”. 

ISa 20:10 David then said to Jonathan, “Who will let me know if your father gives you a harsh answer?”. 

ISa 20:11 Jonathan then said to David, “Come on, let us go out into the country”, and the pair of them went out 
into the country. 

ISa 20:12 Jonathan then said to David, “By Yahweh, God of Israel! I shall sound my father this time tomorrow; if 



all is well for David and I do not then send and inform you, 

ISa 20:13 may Yahweh bring unnameable ills to Jonathan and worse ones too! If my father intends to do you a 
mischief, I shall tell you so and let you get away, so that you can be safe. And may Yahweh be with you as he 
used to be with my father! 

1 Sa 20: 1 4 If I am still alive, show your servant faithful love; if I die, 

1 Sa 20: 1 5 never withdraw your faithful love from my family. When Yahweh has exterminated every enemy of 
David’s from the face of the earth, 

ISa 20:16 do not let Jonathan’s name be exterminated with Saul’s family, or may Yahweh call David to 
account!”. 

ISa 20:17 Jonathan then renewed his oath to David, since he loved him like his very soul. 

ISa 20:18 Jonathan then said to David, “Tomorrow is New Moon; your absence will be noticed, since your place 
will be empty. 

ISa 20:19 The day after tomorrow your absence will be very marked, and you must go to the place where you 
hid on the day of the deed, and stay beside that mound. 

ISa 20:20 For my part, the day after tomorrow I shall shoot three arrows in that direction, as though at a target. 

1 Sa 20:21 I shall then send a servant to go and find the arrows. If I say to him, ‘The arrows are this side of you, 
get them’, come out, since all will be well for you and nothing the matter, as sure as Yahweh lives. 

1 Sa 20:22 But if I say to him, ‘The arrows are ahead of you’, then be off, for Yahweh himself will be sending 
you away. 

ISa 20:23 And as regards the agreement we made, you and I, why, Yahweh is witness between us for ever”. 
ISa 20:24 So David hid in the country; New Moon came and the king sat down to his meal. 

ISa 20:25 He sat in his usual place with his back to the wall, Jonathan sat facing him and Abner sat next to 
Saul; but David’s place was empty. 

ISa 20:26 Saul said nothing that day, thinking, “It is sheer chance; he is unclean”. 

ISa 20:27 On the day after New Moon, the second day, David’s place was still empty. 

1 Sa 20:28 Saul said to his son Jonathan, “Why did not the son of Jesse come to the meal either yesterday or 
today?”. 

ISa 20:29 Jonathan answered Saul, “David insistently asked me for permission to go to Bethlehem. ‘Please let 
me go’, he said, ‘for we are holding the clan sacrifice in the town and my brothers have ordered me to attend. 

So now, if I enjoy your favour, let me get away and see my brothers’. That is why he has not come to the king’s 
table”. 

1 Sa 20:30 Saul flew into a rage with Jonathan and said, “Son of a rebellious slut! Don’t I know that you side with 
the son of Jesse to your own shame and your mother’s dishonour? 

ISa 20:31 As long as the son of Jesse lives on earth, neither you nor your royal rights are secure. Now have 
him fetched and brought to me; he deserves to die”. 

ISa 20:32 Jonathan retorted to his father Saul, “Why should he die? What has he done?”. 

1 Sa 20:33 But Saul brandished his spear at him to strike him, and Jonathan realised that his father was 
determined that David should die. 

ISa 20:34 Hot with anger, Jonathan got up from the table and ate nothing on the second day of the month, 
being upset about David - and because his father had insulted him. 

1 Sa 20:35 Next morning, Jonathan went out into the country at the time agreed with David, taking a young 
servant with him. 

ISa 20:36 He said to his servant, “Run and find the arrows which I am going to shoot”, and the servant ran while 
Jonathan shot an arrow ahead of him. 

ISa 20:37 When the servant reached the spot to which Jonathan had shot the arrow, Jonathan shouted after 
him, “Is not the arrow ahead of you?”. 

ISa 20:38 Again Jonathan shouted after the servant, “Quick! Hurry, do not stand around”. Jonathan’s servant 
picked up the arrow and brought it back to his master. 

1 Sa 20:39 The servant suspected nothing; only Jonathan and David knew what was meant. 

ISa 20:40 Jonathan then gave his weapons to his servant and said, “Go and carry them to the town”. 

ISa 20:41 As soon as the servant had gone, David stood up beside the mound, threw himself to the ground, 
prostrating himself three times. They then embraced each other, both weeping copiously. 

ISa 20:42 Jonathan then said to David, “Go in peace. And as regards the oath that both of us have sworn by 
the name of Yahweh, may Yahweh be witness between you and me, between your descendants and mine for 
ever”. 

ISa 21:1 David then got up and left, and Jonathan went back to the town. 

1 Sa 21 :2 David then went to Nob, to Ahimelech the priest. Ahimelech came out trembling to meet David and 
said, “Why are you alone? Why is nobody with you?”. 

1 Sa 21 :3 David replied to Ahimelech the priest, “The king has given me an order and said to me, ‘Do not let 



anyone know anything about the mission on which I am sending you, or about the order which I have given you’. 
I have arranged to meet the guards at such and such a place. 

1 Sa 21 :4 Meanwhile, if you have five loaves of bread to hand, give them to me, or whatever there is”. 

ISa 21:5 The priest replied to David, “I have no ordinary bread to hand; there are only consecrated loaves of 
permanent offering - provided that the men have kept themselves from women?”. 

ISa 21 :6 David replied to the priest, “Certainly, women have been forbidden to us, as always when I set off on a 
campaign. The men’s things are clean. Though this is a profane journey, they are certainly clean today as far as 
their things are concerned”. 

1 Sa 21 :7 The priest then gave him what had been consecrated, for the only bread there was the loaves of 
permanent offering, which is taken out of Yahweh’s presence, to be replaced by warm bread on the day when it 
is removed. 

1 Sa 21 :8 Now one of Saul’s servants happened to be there that day, detained in Yahweh’s presence; his name 
was Doeg the Edomite and he was the strongest of Saul’s shepherds. 

1 Sa 21 :9 David then said to Ahimelech, “Have you no spear or sword here to hand? I did not bring either my 
sword or my weapons with me, because the king’s business was urgent”. 

ISa 21:10 The priest replied, “The sword of Goliath the Philistine whom you killed in the Valley of the Terebinth 
is here, wrapped in a piece of clothing behind the ephod; if you care to take it, do so, for that is the only one 
here”. David said, “There is nothing like that one; give it to me”. 

ISa 21:11 David journeyed on and that day fled out of Saul’s reach, going to Achish king of Gath. 

ISa 21:12 Achish’s servants said to him, “Is not this David, the king of the country? Was it not of him that they 
sang as they danced: Saul has killed his thousands, and David his tens of thousands?”. 

ISa 21:13 David pondered on these words and became very frightened of Achish king of Gath. 

ISa 21:14 When their eyes were on him, he played the madman and, when they held him, he feigned lunacy. 

He drummed his feet on the doors of the gate and let his spittle run down his beard. 

ISa 21:15 Achish said to his servants, “You can see that this man is mad. Why bring him to me? 

ISa 21:16 Have I not enough madmen, without your bringing me this one to weary me with his antics? Is he to 
join my household?”. 

ISa 22:1 David left there and took refuge in the Cave of Adullam; his brothers and his father’s whole family 
heard this and joined him there. 

ISa 22:2 All those in distress, all those in debt, all those who had a grievance, gathered round him and he 
became their leader. There were about four hundred men with him. 

ISa 22:3 From there David went to Mizpah in Moab and said to the king of Moab, “Allow my father and mother 
to stay with you until I know what God intends to do for me”. 

ISa 22:4 He left them with the king of Moab and there they stayed all the time that David was in the stronghold. 

1 Sa 22:5 The prophet Gad, however, said to David, “Do not stay in the stronghold; leave and make your way 
into the territory of Judah”. David then left and went to the forest of Hereth. 

ISa 22:6 When Saul heard that David and the men with him had been discovered, Saul was at Gibeah, seated 
under the tamarisk on the high place, spear in hand, with all his staff standing round him. 

ISa 22:7 “Listen, Benjaminites!”. said Saul to them, “Is the son of Jesse going to give you all fields and vineyards 
and make all of you commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds 

1 Sa 22:8 that you all conspire against me? No one warned me when my son made a pact with the son of Jesse; 
none of you felt sorry for me or warned me when my son incited my servant to become my enemy, as he is now”. 
1 Sa 22:9 Then, up spoke Doeg the Edomite, who was in command of Saul’s staff, “I saw the son of Jesse 
coming to Nob, to Ahimelech son of Ahitub. 

ISa 22:10 That man consulted Yahweh on his behalf, gave him provisions and also the sword of Goliath the 
Philistine”. 

ISa 22:11 The king then sent for the priest Ahimelech son of Ahitub and his whole family, the priests of Nob; 
they all came to the king. 

ISa 22:12 Saul said, “Now listen, son of Ahitub!”. He replied, “Here I am, my lord”. 

ISa 22:13 “Why have you conspired against me”, said Saul, “you and the son of Jesse, giving him bread and a 
sword and consulting God on his behalf, for him to rebel against me as is now the case?”. 

ISa 22:14 Ahimelech replied to the king, “Of all those in your service, who is more loyal than David son-in-law to 
the king, captain of your bodyguard, honoured in your household? 

ISa 22:15 Was today the first time I ever consulted God on his behalf? Indeed it was not! The king has no 
grounds for bringing any charge against his servant or against his whole family, for your servant knew nothing 
whatever about all this”. 

ISa 22:16 The king retorted, “You must die, Ahimelech, you and your whole family”. 

ISa 22:17 The king said to the scouts who were standing round him, “Forward! and put the priests of Yahweh to 
death, for they too are on David’s side, they knew that he was escaping, yet did not warn me of it”. The king’s 



professional soldiers, however, would not lift a hand to strike the priests of Yahweh. 

ISa 22:18 The king then said to Doeg, “Forward, you! Fall on the priests! 1 Doeg the Edomite stepped forward 
and fell on the priests, himself that day killing eighty-five men who wore the linen ephod. 

ISa 22:19 Nob, the town of the priests, Saul put to the sword: men and women, children and infants, cattle, 
donkeys and sheep. 

1 Sa 22:20 One son of Ahimelech son of Ahitub alone escaped. His name was Abiathar, and he fled away to join 
David. 

ISa 22:21 When Abiathar told David that Saul had slaughtered the priests of Yahweh, 

ISa 22:22 David said to Abiathar, “I knew, that day when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would be sure to 
inform Saul. I am responsible for the death of all your kinsmen. 

ISa 22:23 Stay with me, do not be afraid, for he who seeks your life seeks mine; you will be safe with me”. 

ISa 23:1 News was then brought to David, “The Philistines are besieging Keilah and plundering the threshing- 
floors”. 

ISa 23:2 David consulted Yahweh, “Shall I go and fight these Philistines?”. Yahweh replied to David, “Go and 
fight the Philistines and save Keilah”. 

ISa 23:3 But David’s men said to him, “We are already afraid here in Judah; how much more, then, if we go to 
Keilah to fight the Philistine troops!”. 

ISa 23:4 So David consulted Yahweh again and Yahweh replied, “Be on your way; go down to Keilah, since I 
shall give the Philistines into your power”. 

1 Sa 23:5 So David and his men went to Keilah and fought the Philistines and carried off their cattle and inflicted 
a great defeat on them. Thus David saved the inhabitants of Keilah. 

ISa 23:6 When Abiathar son of Ahimelech took refuge with David, he went down to Keilah with the ephod in his 
hand. 

ISa 23:7 When word was brought to Saul that David had gone to Keilah he said, “God has delivered him into 
my power: he has trapped himself by going into a town with gates and bars”. 

ISa 23:8 Saul called all the people to arms, to go down to Keilah and besiege David and his men. 

1 Sa 23:9 David, however, was aware that Saul was plotting evil against him, and said to Abiathar the priest, 
“Bring the ephod”. 

ISa 23:10 David said, “Yahweh, God of Israel, your servant has heard that Saul is preparing to come to Keilah 
and destroy the town because of me. 

ISa 23:11 Will Saul come down as your servant has heard? Yahweh, God of Israel, I beg you, let your servant 
know”. Yahweh replied, “He will come down”. 

ISa 23:12 David then went on to ask, “Will the notables of Keilah hand me and my men over to Saul?”. Yahweh 
replied, “They will hand you over”. 

ISa 23:13 At this, David made off with his men, about six hundred in number; they left Keilah and went where 
they could. When Saul was told that David had escaped from Keilah, he abandoned the expedition. 

ISa 23:14 David stayed in the desert, in the strongholds; he stayed in the mountains, in the desert of Ziph; Saul 
kept looking for him day after day, but God did not deliver him into his power. 

ISa 23:15 David was aware that Saul had mounted an expedition to take his life. David was then at Horesh in 
the desert of Ziph. 

ISa 23:16 Jonathan son of Saul set off and went to David at Horesh and encouraged him in the name of God. 
ISa 23:17 “Do not be afraid”, he said, “for my father Saul’s hand will not reach you. You are to reign over Israel, 
and I shall be second to you. Saul my father is himself aware of this”. 

ISa 23:18 And the two made a pact before Yahweh. David stayed at Horesh and Jonathan went home. 

ISa 23:19 Some men from Ziph then went up to Saul at Gibeah and said, “Look, David is hiding among us in 
the strongholds at Horesh, on the Hill of Hachilah to the south of the wastelands. 

1 Sa 23:20 Now whenever you wish to go down, my lord king, do so; we shall make it our task to hand him over 
to the king”. 

ISa 23:21 Saul replied, “May you be blessed by Yahweh for sympathising with me. 

ISa 23:22 Go and make doubly sure, find out exactly what place he frequents, for I have been told that he is 
very cunning. 

ISa 23:23 Take careful note of all the hiding places where he lurks, and come back to me when you are certain. 
I shall then come with you and, if he is in the country, I shall track him down through every clan in Judah!”. 

ISa 23:24 Setting off they went to Ziph ahead of Saul. Meanwhile, David and his men were in the desert of 
Maon, in the plain to the south of the wastelands. 

ISa 23:25 When Saul and his men set out in search, David was told and went down to the gorge running 
through the desert of Maon. 

ISa 23:26 Saul and his men proceeded along one side of the mountain, David and his men along the other. 
David was hurrying to escape from Saul, while Saul and his men were trying to cross over to David and his 



men’s side, to capture them, 

ISa 23:27 when a messenger came to Saul and said, “Come at once, the Philistines have invaded the country”. 

1 Sa 23:28 So Saul broke off his pursuit of David and went to oppose the Philistines. That is why the place is 
called the Gorge of Separations. 

ISa 24:1 From there David went up and installed himself in the strongholds of En-Gedi. 

ISa 24:2 Once Saul was back from pursuing the Philistines, he was told, “David is now in the desert of En-Gedi”. 
ISa 24:3 Saul thereupon took three thousand men selected from all Israel and went in search of David and his 
men east of the Rocks of the Mountain Goats. 

ISa 24:4 He came to the sheepfolds along the route, where there was a cave, and went in to cover his feet. 

Now David and his men were sitting in the recesses of the cave; 

1 Sa 24:5 David’s men said to him, “Today is the day of which Yahweh said to you, ‘I shall deliver your enemy 
into your power; do what you like with him’”. David got up and, unobserved, cut off the border of Saul’s cloak. 

1 Sa 24:6 Afterwards David reproached himself for having cut off the border of Saul’s cloak. 

ISa 24:7 He said to his men, “Yahweh preserve me from doing such a thing to my lord as to raise my hand 
against him, since he is Yahweh’s anointed”. 

ISa 24:8 By these words David restrained his men and would not let them attack Saul. 

ISa 24:9 Saul then left the cave and went on his way. After this, David too left the cave and called after Saul, 
“My lord king!”. Saul looked behind him and David, bowing to the ground, prostrated himself. 

ISa 24:10 David then said to Saul, “Why do you listen to people who say, ‘David intends your ruin?’ 

1 Sa 24: 1 1 This very day you have seen for yourself how Yahweh put you in my power in the cave and how, 
refusing to kill you, I spared you saying, ‘I will not raise my hand against my lord, since he is Yahweh’s 
anointed’. 

ISa 24:12 Look, father, look at the border of your cloak in my hand. Since, although I cut the border off your 
cloak, I did not kill you, surely you realise that I intend neither mischief nor crime. I have not wronged you, and 
yet you hunt me down to take my life. 

1 Sa 24: 1 3 May Yahweh be judge between me and you, and may Yahweh avenge me on you; but I shall never 
lay a hand on you! 

ISa 24:14 (As the old proverb says: Wickedness comes out of wicked people, but I shall never lay a hand on 
you!) 

ISa 24:15 On whose trail is the king of Israel campaigning? Whom are you pursuing? On the trail of a dead 
dog, of a flea! 

ISa 24:16 May Yahweh be the judge and decide between me and you; may he examine and defend my cause 
and give judgement for me by rescuing me from your clutches!”. 

ISa 24:17 When David had finished saying this to Saul, Saul said, “Is that your voice, my son David?”. And Saul 
began to weep aloud. 

ISa 24:18 “You are upright and I am not”, he said to David, “since you have behaved well to me, whereäs I have 
behaved badly to you. 

ISa 24:19 And today you have shown how well you have behaved to me, since Yahweh had put me in your 
power but you did not kill me. 

1 Sa 24:20 When a man comes on his enemy, does he let him go unmolested? May Yahweh reward you for the 
good you have done me today! 

ISa 24:21 Now I know that you will indeed reign and that the sovereignty in Israel will pass into your hands. 

1 Sa 24:22 Now swear to me by Yahweh that you will not suppress my descendants once I am gone, or blot my 
name out of my family”. 

ISa 24:23 This David swore to Saul, and Saul went home while David and his men went back to the stronghold. 
ISa 25:1 Samuel died and all Israel assembled to mourn for him. They buried him at his home in Ramah. David 
then set off and went down to the desert of Maon. 

ISa 25:2 Now, there was a man in Maon whose business was at Carmel; the man was very rich: he owned 
three thousand sheep and a thousand goats. He was then at Carmel, having his sheep shorn. 

ISa 25:3 The man’s name was Nabal and his wife’s Abigail. She was a woman of intelligence and beauty, but 
the man was miserly and churlish. He was a Calebite. 

ISa 25:4 When David heard in the desert that Nabal was at his sheepshearing, 

ISa 25:5 he sent ten men off, having said to them, “Go up to Carmel, visit Nabal and greet him from me. 

ISa 25:6 And this is what you are to say to my brother, ‘Peace to you, peace to your family, peace to all that is 
yours! 

1 Sa 25:7 I hear that you now have the shearers; your shepherds were with us recently: we did not molest them, 
nor did they lose anything all the while they were at Carmel. 

ISa 25:8 Ask your young men and they will tell you. I hope that you will give the men a welcome, coming as we 
do on a festival. Whatever you have to hand please give to your servants and to your son David’”. 



ISa 25:9 David’s men went and said all this to Nabal for David, and waited. 

ISa 25:10 Nabal retorted to the men in David’s service, “Who is David? Who is the son of Jesse? 

ISa 25:11 There are many servants nowadays who run away from their masters. Am I to take my bread and my 
wine and the meat that I have slaughtered for my shearers and give it to men who come from I know not where?”. 
ISa 25:12 David’s men turned on their heels and went back, and on their arrival told him exactly what had been 
said. 

ISa 25:13 David then said to his men, “Every man buckle on his sword!”. And they buckled on their swords, and 
David buckled on his too; about four hundred followed David while two hundred stayed with the baggage. 

ISa 25:14 Now one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife. He said, “David sent messengers from the 
desert to greet our master, but he flared up at them. 

ISa 25:15 Now, these men were very good to us; they did not molest us and we lost nothing all the time we had 
anything to do with them while we were out in the country. 

ISa 25:16 Night and day, they were like a rampart to us, all the time we were with them, minding the sheep. 

1 Sa 25: 1 7 So now make up your mind what you should do, for the ruin of our master and his whole family is a 
certainty, and he is such a brute that no one can say a word to him”. 

ISa 25:18 Abigail hastily took two hundred loaves, two skins of wine, five sheep ready prepared, five measures 
of roasted grain, a hundred bunches of raisins and two hundred cakes of figs and loaded them on donkeys. 

ISa 25:19 She said to her servants, “Go on ahead, I shall follow you” — but she did not tell her husband Nabal. 
ISa 25:20 As she was riding her donkey down behind a fold in the mountain, David and his men happened to 
be coming down in her direction; and she met them. 

1 Sa 25:21 Now, David had decided, “It was a waste of time my guarding all this man’s property in the desert so 
that he lost nothing at all! He has repaid me bad for good. 

ISa 25:22 May God bring unnameable ills on David and worse ones, too, if by morning I leave a single manjack 
alive of all who belong to him!”. 

ISa 25:23 As soon as Abigail saw David, she quickly dismounted from the donkey and, falling on her face in 
front of David, prostrated herself on the ground. 

ISa 25:24 She fell at his feet and said, “Let me take the blame, my lord. Let your servant speak in your ear; 
listen to what your servant has to say! 

ISa 25:25 My lord, please pay no attention to this brute Nabal for his nature is like his name; ‘Brute’ is his 
name and brutal he is. But I, your servant, did not see the men whom my lord sent. 

ISa 25:26 And now, my lord, as Yahweh lives and as your soul lives, by Yahweh who kept you from the crime 
of bloodshed and from taking vengeance with your own hand, may your enemies and all those ill-disposed 
towards you become like Nabal. 

1 Sa 25:27 As for the present which your servant has brought my lord, I should like this to be given to the men in 
your service. 

ISa 25:28 Please forgive your servant for any offence I have given you, for Yahweh will certainly assure you of 
a lasting dynasty, since you are fighting Yahweh’s battles and no fault has been found in you throughout your 
life. 

ISa 25:29 Should anyone set out to hunt you down and try to kill you, your life will be kept close in the wallet of 
life with Yahweh your God, while your enemies’ lives he will fling out of the pouch of the sling. 

1 Sa 25:30 Once Yahweh has done for you all the good things which he has said he will do for you, and made 
you ruler of Israel, 

ISa 25:31 you must have no anxiety, my lord, no remorse, over having wantonly shed blood, over having taken 
a revenge. When Yahweh has done well by you, then remember your servant”. 

ISa 25:32 David said to Abigail, “Blessed be Yahweh, God of Israel, who sent you to meet me today! 

ISa 25:33 Blessed be your wisdom and blessed you yourself for today having restrained me from the crime of 
bloodshed and from exacting revenge! 

ISa 25:34 But as Yahweh, God of Israel, lives, who prevented me from harming you, had you not hurried out to 
meet me, I swear Nabal would not have had a single manjack left alive by morning!”. 

ISa 25:35 David then accepted what she had brought him and said, “Go home in peace; yes, I have listened to 
you and have pardoned you”. 

ISa 25:36 Abigail returned to Nabal. He was holding a feast, a princely feast, in his house; Nabal was in high 
spirits, and as he was very drunk she told him nothing at all till it was daylight. 

ISa 25:37 In the morning, when Nabal’s wine had left him and his wife told him everything that had happened, 
his heart died within him and he became like a stone. 

ISa 25:38 About ten days later Yahweh struck Nabal, and he died. 

ISa 25:39 When David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, “Blessed be Yahweh for having defended my cause 
over the insult which I received from Nabal, and for having restrained his servant from doing wrong! Yahweh has 
made Nabal’s wickedness rebound on his own head!”. 



ISa 25:40 David then sent Abigail an offer of marriage. When the men in David’s service came to Abigail at 
Carmel, they said, “David has sent us to take you to him, to be his wife”. 

1 Sa 25:41 She stood up, then prostrated herself on the ground. “Consider your servant a slave”, she said, “to 
wash the feet of my lord’s servants”. 

ISa 25:42 Quickly Abigail stood up again and mounted a donkey; followed by five of her servant-girls, she 
followed David’s messengers and became his wife. 

1 Sa 25:43 David had also married Ahinoam of Jezreel and he kept them both as wives. 

ISa 25:44 Saul had given his daughter Michal, David’s wife, to Palti son of Laish, from Gallim. 

ISa 26:1 Some men from Ziph went to Saul at Gibeah and said, “Look, David is hiding on the Hill of Hachilah on 
the edge of the wastelands!”. 

ISa 26:2 So Saul set off and went down to the desert of Ziph, accompanied by three thousand picked men of 
Israel, to search for David in the desert of Ziph. 

1 Sa 26:3 Saul pitched camp on the Hill of Hachilah, which is on the edge of the wastelands near the road. David 
was then living in the desert and saw that Saul had come after him into the desert. 

ISa 26:4 Accordingly, David sent out spies and learned that Saul had indeed arrived. 

ISa 26:5 Setting off, David went to the place where Saul had pitched camp. He saw the place where Saul and 
Abner son of Ner, commander of his army, had bedded down. Saul had bedded down inside the camp with the 
troops bivouacking round him. 

ISa 26:6 Speaking to Ahimelech the Hittite and Abishai son of Zeruiah and brother of Joab, David said, “Who 
will come down with me to the camp, to Saul?”. Abishai answered, “I will go down with you”. 

1 Sa 26:7 So in the dark David and Abishai made their way towards the force, where they found Saul lying 
asleep inside the camp, his spear stuck in the ground beside his head, with Abner and the troops lying round 
him. 

ISa 26:8 Abishai then said to David, “Today God has put your enemy in your power; so now let me pin him to 
the ground with his own spear. Just one stroke! I shall not need to strike him twice”. 

1 Sa 26:9 David said to Abishai, “Do not kill him, for who could raise his hand against Yahweh’s anointed and go 
unpunished? 

ISa 26:10 As Yahweh lives”, David said, “Yahweh himself will strike him down: either the day will come for him 
to die, or he will go into battle and perish then. 

ISa 26:11 Yahweh forbid that I should raise my hand against Yahweh’s anointed! But now let us take the spear 
beside his head and the pitcher of water, and let us go away”. 

ISa 26:12 David took the spear and the pitcher of water from beside Saul’s head, and they made off. No one 
saw, no one knew, no one woke up; they were all asleep, because a torpor from Yahweh had fallen on them. 

ISa 26:13 David crossed to the other side and halted on the top of the mountain a long way off; there was a 
wide space between them. 

ISa 26:14 David then called out to the troops and to Abner son of Ner, “Abner, why don’t you answer?”. Abner 
replied, “Who is that calling?”. 

ISa 26:15 David said to Abner, “Are you not a man? Who is your equal in Israel? Why, then, did you not guard 
the king your lord? One of the people came to kill the king your lord. 

ISa 26:16 What you did was not well done. As Yahweh lives, you all deserve to die since you did not guard 
your lord, Yahweh’s anointed. Look where the king’s spear is now, and the pitcher of water which was beside his 
head!”. 

ISa 26:17 Recognising David’s voice, Saul said, “Is that your voice, my son David?”. David replied, “It is my 
voice, my lord king. 

ISa 26:18 Why is my lord pursuing his servant?”. he said. “What have I done? What crime have I committed? 

ISa 26:19 May my lord king now listen to his servant’s words: if Yahweh has incited you against me, may he be 
appeased with an offering; but if human beings have done it, may they be accursed before Yahweh, since they 
have as effectively banished me today from sharing in Yahweh’s heritage as if they had said, ‘Go and serve 
other gods!’. 

ISa 26:20 So I pray now that my blood shall not be shed on soil remote from Yahweh’s presence, when the 
king of Israel has mounted an expedition to take my life, as one might hunt a partridge in the mountains!”. 

ISa 26:21 Saul replied, “I have done wrong! Come back, my son David; I shall never harm you again, since 
today you have shown respect for my life. Yes, I have behaved like a fool, I have been profoundly in the wrong”. 
ISa 26:22 In reply, David said, “Here is the king’s spear. Let one of the men come across and get it. 

ISa 26:23 May Yahweh reward each as each has been upright and loyal. Today Yahweh put you in my power 
but I would not raise my hand against Yahweh’s anointed. 

ISa 26:24 As today I set great value by your life, so may Yahweh set great value by my life and deliver me from 
every tribulation!”. 

ISa 26:25 Saul then said, “May you be blessed, my son David! In what you undertake, you will certainly 



succeed”. David then went on his way and Saul returned home. 

ISa 27:1 “One of these days”, David thought, “I shall perish at the hand of Saul. The best thing that I can do is to 
get away into the country of the Philistines; then Saul will give up tracking me through the length and breadth of 
Israel and I shall be safe from him”. 

ISa 27:2 So David set off and went over, he and his six hundred men, to Achish son of Maoch, king of Gath. 
ISa 27:3 He settled at Gath with Achish, he and his men, each with his family and David with his two wives, 
Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail widow of Nabal of Carmel. 

ISa 27:4 When news reached Saul that David had fled to Gath, he stopped searching for him. 

ISa 27:5 David said to Achish, “If I have won your favour, let me be given a place in one of the outlying towns, 
where I can live. Why should your servant live in the royal city with you?”. 

ISa 27:6 That very day Achish gave him Ziklag; and this is why Ziklag has been the property of the kings of 
Judah to the present day. 

ISa 27:7 The time that David stayed in Philistine territory amounted to a year and four months. 

ISa 27:8 David and his men went out on raids against the Geshurites, Girzites and Amalekites, for these are 
the tribes inhabiting the region which, from Telam, goes in the direction of Shur, as far as Egypt. 

ISa 27:9 David laid the countryside waste and left neither man nor woman alive; he carried off the sheep and 
cattle, the donkeys, camels and clothing, and then came back again to Achish. 

ISa 27:10 Achish would ask, “Where did you go raiding today?”. David would reply, “Against the Negeb of 
Judah”, or “the Negeb of Jerahmeel”, or “the Negeb of the Kenites”. 

ISa 27:11 David spared neither man nor woman to bring back alive to Gath, “in case”, as he thought, “they 
inform on us and say, ‘David did such and such’”. This was the way David conducted his raids all the time he 
stayed in Philistine territory. 

ISa 27:12 Achish trusted David. “He has made himself detested by his own people Israel”, he thought, “and so 
will be my servant for ever”. 

1 Sa 28: 1 It then happened that the Philistines mustered their forces for war, to fight Israel, and Achish said to 
David, “It is understood that you and your men go into battle with me”. 

ISa 28:2 David said to Achish, “In that case, you will soon see what your servant can do”. Achish replied to 
David, “Right, I shall appoint you as my permanent bodyguard”. 

ISa 28:3 Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had mourned him and buried him at Ramah, his own town. Saul 
had expelled the necromancers and wizards from the country. 

ISa 28:4 Meanwhile the Philistines had mustered and had come and pitched camp at Shunem. Saul mustered 
all Israel and they encamped at Gilboa. 

ISa 28:5 When Saul saw the Philistine camp, he was afraid and his heart trembled violently. 

ISa 28:6 Saul consulted Yahweh, but Yahweh gave him no answer, either by dream, divination or prophet. 

ISa 28:7 Saul then said to his servants, “Find a necromancer for me, so that I can go and consult her”. His 
servants replied, “There is a necromancer at En-Dor”. 

ISa 28:8 And so Saul, disguising himself and changing his clothes, set out accompanied by two men; their visit 
to the woman took place at night. “Disclose the future to me”, he said, “by means of a ghost. Conjure up the one I 
shall name to you”. 

ISa 28:9 The woman replied, “Look, you know what Saul has done, how he has outlawed necromancers and 
wizards from the country; why are you setting a trap for my life, then, to have me killed?”. 

ISa 28:10 But Saul swore to her by Yahweh, “As Yahweh lives”, he said, “no blame shall attach to you for this 
business”. 

ISa 28:11 The woman asked, “Whom shall I conjure up for you?”. He replied, “Conjure up Samuel”. 

ISa 28:12 The woman then saw Samuel and, giving a great cry, she said to Saul, “Why have you deceived me? 
You are Saul!”. 

ISa 28:13 The king said, “Do not be afraid! What do you see?”. The woman replied to Saul, “I see a ghost rising 
from the earth”. 

ISa 28:14 “What is he like?”. he asked. She replied, “It is an old man coming up; he is wrapped in a cloak”. Saul 
then knew that it was Samuel and, bowing to the ground, prostrated himself. 

ISa 28:15 Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed my rest by conjuring me up?”. Saul replied, “I am in 
great distress; the Philistines are waging war on me, and God has abandoned me and no longer answers me 
either by prophet or by dream; and so I have summoned you to tell me what I ought to do”. 

ISa 28:16 Samuel said, “Why consult me, when Yahweh has abandoned you and has become your enemy? 
ISa 28:17 Yahweh has treated you as he foretold through me; he has snatched the sovereignty from your hand 
and given it to your neighbour, David, 

ISa 28:18 because you disobeyed Yahweh’s voice and did not execute his fierce anger against Amalek. That is 
why Yahweh is treating you like this today. 

ISa 28:19 What is more, Yahweh will deliver Israel and you too, into the power of the Philistines. Tomorrow you 



and your sons will be with me; and Yahweh will hand over the army of Israel into the power of the Philistines”. 

ISa 28:20 Immediately Saul fell full length on the ground. He was terrified by what Samuel had said and was 
also weak from having eaten nothing all that day and night. 

ISa 28:21 The woman went to Saul and, seeing his terror, said, “Look, your servant has obeyed your order; I 
have taken my life in my hands and obeyed the command which you gave me. 

ISa 28:22 Now please, you in your turn listen to what your servant has to say. Let me offer you a piece of 
bread. Eat something and get some strength for your journey”. 

ISa 28:23 But he refused. “I will not eat”, he said. His servants however pressed him, and so did the woman. 
Allowing himself to be persuaded by them, he got up from the ground and sat on the bed. 

ISa 28:24 The woman owned a fattened calf which she quickly slaughtered, and she took some flour and 
kneaded it and with it baked some unleavened cakes 

1 Sa 28:25 which she served to Saul and his servants; they ate, and then set off and left the same night. 

1 Sa 29: 1 The Philistines mustered all their forces at Aphek while the Israelites pitched camp near the spring in 
Jezreel. 

1 Sa 29:2 The Philistine commanders marched past with their hundreds and their thousands, and David and his 
men brought up the rear with Achish. 

ISa 29:3 The Philistine chiefs asked, “What are these Hebrews doing?”. Achish replied to them, “Why, this is 
David the servant of Saul, king of Israel, who has been with me for the last year or two. I have had no fault to find 
with him from the day he gave himself up to me until the present time”. 

ISa 29:4 But the Philistine chiefs were angry with him. “Send the man back”, they said, “make him go back to the 
place which you assigned to him. He cannot go into battle with us, in case he turns on us once battle is joined. 
Would there be a better way for the man to regain his master’s favour than with the heads of these men here? 

1 Sa 29:5 Is not this the David of whom they sang as they danced: Saul has killed his thousands, and David his 
tens of thousands'? 

ISa 29:6 So Achish called David and said, “As Yahweh lives, you are loyal, and I am quite content with all your 
doings in our campaigning together, since I have found no fault with you from the day you came to me until the 
present time. But you are not acceptable to the chiefs. 

ISa 29:7 So go home, in peace, rather than antagonise them”. 

1 Sa 29:8 “But what have I done”, David asked Achish, “what fault have you had to find with your servant from the 
day I entered your service to the present time, for me not to be allowed to go and fight the enemies of my lord 
the king?”. 

ISa 29:9 In reply, Achish said to David, “In my opinion, it is true, you are as good as an angel of God; but the 
Philistine chiefs have said, ‘He must not go into battle with us’. 

ISa 29:10 So get up early tomorrow morning, with your master’s servants who came with you, and go to the 
place which I assigned to you. Do not harbour resentment, since personally I have no fault to find with you. Get 
up early tomorrow morning and, as soon as it is light, be off”. 

1 Sa 29: 1 1 So David and his men got up early to leave at dawn and go back to Philistine territory. And the 
Philistines marched on Jezreel. 

ISa 30:1 Now by the time David and his men reached Ziklag three days later, the Amalekites had raided the 
Negeb and Ziklag; they had sacked Ziklag and burnt it down. 

ISa 30:2 They had taken the women prisoner, and everyone who was there, both small and great. They had not 
killed anyone, but had carried them off and gone away. 

1 Sa 30:3 When David and his men arrived, they found the town burnt down and their wives and sons and 
daughters taken captive. 

ISa 30:4 Then David and the people with him wept aloud till they were too weak to weep any more. 

1 Sa 30:5 David’s two wives had been captured: Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail widow of Nabal of Carmel. 

ISa 30:6 David was in great trouble, since the people were talking of stoning him; the people all felt very bitter, 
each man for his own sons and daughters. But David took courage from Yahweh his God. 

ISa 30:7 To the priest Abiathar son of Ahimelech, David said, “Bring me the ephod”. Abiathar brought the ephod 
to David. 

ISa 30:8 David then consulted Yahweh, “Shall I go in pursuit of these raiders? Will I overtake them?”. The 
answer was, “Go in pursuit; you will certainly overtake them and rescue the captives”. 

ISa 30:9 David accordingly set off with the six hundred men who were with him and reached the torrent of 
Besor. 

ISa 30:10 David then continued the pursuit with four hundred men, two hundred staying behind who were too 
exhausted to cross the torrent of Besor. 

ISa 30:11 Out in the country they found an Egyptian and brought him to David. They gave him some bread to 
eat and some water to drink; 

ISa 30:12 they also gave him a piece of fig cake and two bunches of raisins; he ate these and his spirits revived 



— he had had nothing to eat or drink for three days and three nights. 

ISa 30:13 David then said to him, “Whose man are you and where do you come from?”. He replied, “I am a 
young Egyptian, the slave of an Amalekite; my master abandoned me because I fell sick three days ago. 

1 Sa 30: 1 4 We raided the Negeb of the Cherethites, and the Negeb of Judah, and the Negeb of Caleb too, and 
we burnt Ziklag down”. 

ISa 30:15 David said, “Will you guide me to these raiders?”. He replied, “Swear to me by God not to kill me or 
hand me over to my master, and I will guide you to these raiders”. 

ISa 30:16 He guided him to them, and there they were, scattered over the whole countryside, eating, drinking 
and celebrating, on account of the enormous booty which they had brought back from the territory of the 
Philistines and the territory of Judah. 

ISa 30:17 David slaughtered them from dawn until the evening of the following day. No one escaped, except 
four hundred young men who mounted camels and fled. 

ISa 30:18 He rescued everything that the Amalekites had taken — David also rescued his two wives. 

1 Sa 30: 1 9 Nothing of theirs was lost, whether small or great, from the booty or sons and daughters — everything 
that had been taken from them; David recovered everything. 

ISa 30:20 They captured the flocks and herds as well and drove them in front of him. “This is David’s booty”, 
they shouted. 

ISa 30:21 When David reached the two hundred men who had been too exhausted to follow him and whom he 
had left at the torrent of Besor, they came out to meet David and the party accompanying him; David 
approached with his party and greeted them. 

ISa 30:22 But all the rogues and scoundrels among the men who had gone with David began saying, “Since 
they did not go with us, we shall not give them any of the booty which we have rescued, except that each of 
them can have his wife and children. Let them take them away and be off”. 

ISa 30:23 But David said, “Do not behave like this, brothers, with what Yahweh has given us; he has protected 
us and has handed over to us the raiders who attacked us. 

1 Sa 30:24 Who would agree with you on this? No: As the share of the man who goes into battle, so is the share 
of the man who stays with the baggage. They will share alike”. 

ISa 30:25 And from that day on, he made that a rule and custom for Israel, which obtains to the present day. 
ISa 30:26 When David reached Ziklag, he sent parts of the booty to the elders of Judah, town by town, with this 
message, “Here is a present for you, taken from the booty of Yahweh’s enemies': 

ISa 30:27 to those in Bethel, to those in Ramoth of the Negeb, 

ISa 30:28 to those in Jattir, to those in Aroer, to those in Siphmoth, to those in Eshtemoa, 

ISa 30:29 to those in Carmel, to those in the towns of Jerahmeel, to those in the towns of the Kenites, 

ISa 30:30 to those in Hormah, to those in Borashan, to those in Athach, 

ISa 30:31 to those in Hebron and to all the places which David and his men had frequented. 

ISa 31:1 The Philistines gave battle to Israel, and the Israelites, fleeing from the Philistines, fell and were 

slaughtered on Mount Gilboa. 

ISa 31:2 The Philistines bore down on Saul and his sons, and they killed Jonathan, Abinadab and Malchishua, 
Saul’s sons. 

1 Sa 31 :3 The fighting grew fiercer round Saul; the archers came upon him, and he was severely wounded 
1 Sa 31 :4 by the archers. Saul then said to his armour-bearer, “Draw your sword and run me through with it; I do 
not want these uncircumcised men to come and make fun of me”. But his armour-bearer was very much afraid 
and would not do it. So Saul took his own sword and fell on it. 

ISa 31:5 His armour-bearer, seeing that Saul was dead, fell on his sword too and died with him. 

1 Sa 31 :6 Thus died Saul, his three sons and his armour-bearer, together on the same day. 

1 Sa 31 :7 When the Israelites who were on the other side of the Jordan saw that the Israelites had been routed 
and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned their towns and fled. The Philistines then came and 
occupied them. 

1 Sa 31 :8 When the Philistines came on the following day to strip the dead, they found Saul and his three sons 
lying on Mount Gilboa. 

1 Sa 31 :9 They cut off his head and, stripping him of his armour, had these carried round the territory of the 
Philistines to proclaim the good news to their idols and their people. 

ISa 31:10 They put his armour in the temple of Astarte; and his body they fastened to the walls of Beth-Shean. 
ISa 31:11 When the inhabitants of Jabesh in Gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul, 

ISa 31:12 the warriors all set out and, having marched all night, took the bodies of Saul and his sons off the 
walls of Beth-Shean; they brought them to Jabesh and burned them there. 

ISa 31:13 They then took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk of Jabesh, and fasted for seven 
days. 

2Sa 1:1 Saul was dead and David, returning after his victory over the Amalekites, had been at Ziklag for two 



days. 

2Sa 1:2 On the third day, a man arrived from Saul’s camp with his clothes torn and earth on his head. When he 
came to David, he fell to the ground and prostrated himself. 

2Sa 1:3 David asked him, “Where have you come from?”. “I have escaped from the Israelite camp”, he said. 

2Sa 1 :4 David said, “What has happened? Tell me”. He replied, “The people fled from the battle, and many of 
them have fallen and are dead. Saul and his son Jonathan are dead too”. 

2Sa 1 :5 Then David asked the young man who brought the news, “How do you know that Saul and his son 
Jonathan are dead?”. 

2Sa 1:6 The young man replied, “I happened to be on Mount Gilboa, and there was Saul, leaning on his spear, 
with the chariots and the cavalry bearing down on him. 

2Sa 1:7 Glancing behind him and seeing me, he shouted to me. I replied, ‘Here I am!’. 

2Sa 1:8 He said, ‘Who are you?’. I replied, ‘I am an Amalekite’. 

2Sa 1:9 He then said, ‘Come here and kill me. My head is swimming, although I still have all my strength’. 

2Sa 1:10 Sol went over to him and killed him, because I knew that once he fell he could not survive. I then took 
the crown which he had on his head and the bracelet on his arm, and have brought them here to my lord”. 

2Sa 1:11 David then took hold of his clothes and tore them, and all the men with him did the same. 

2Sa 1:12 They mourned and wept and fasted until the evening for Saul and his son Jonathan, for the people of 
Yahweh and for the House of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword. 

2Sa 1:13 David said to the young man who had brought the news, “Where are you from?”. He replied, “I am the 
son of a resident foreigner, an Amalekite”. 

2Sa 1:14 David said, “How was it that you were not afraid to lift your hand to destroy Yahweh’s anointed?”. 

2Sa 1:15 Then David called one of the young men. “Come here”, he said, “strike him down”. The man struck him 
and he died. 

2Sa 1:16 David said, “Your blood be on your own head. You convicted yourself out of your own mouth by 
saying, ‘I killed Yahweh’s anointed’”. 

2Sa 1:17 David sang the following lament over Saul and his son Jonathan 

2Sa 1:18 (it is for teaching archery to the children of Judah; it is written in the Book of the Just): 

2Sa 1:19 Does the splendour of Israel lie dead on your heights? How did the heroes fall? 

2Sa 1 :20 Do not speak of it in Gath, nor broadcast it in the streets of Ashkelon, for fear the daughters of the 
Philistines rejoice, for fear the daughters of the uncircumcised gloat. 

2Sa 1:21 You mountains of Gilboa, no dew, no rain fall on you, O treacherous fields where the heroes’ shield 
lies dishonoured! Not greased with oil, the shield of Saul, 

2Sa 1 :22 but with the blood of wounded men, the fat of warriors! The bow of Jonathan never turned back, the 
sword of Saul never came home unsated! 

2Sa 1:23 Saul and Jonathan, beloved and handsome, were divided neither in life, nor in death. Swifter than 
eagles were they, stronger than lions. 

2Sa 1 :24 O daughters of Israel, weep for Saul who gave you scarlet and fine linen to wear, who pinned golden 
jewellery on your dresses! 

2Sa 1:25 How did the heroes fall in the thick of the battle? Jonathan, by your dying I too am stricken, 

2Sa 1 :26 I am desolate for you, Jonathan my brother. Very dear you were to me, your love more wonderful to 
me than the love of a woman. 

2Sa 1 :27 How did the heroes fall and the weapons of war succumb! 

2Sa 2:1 After this David consulted Yahweh, asking, “Shall I go up to one of the towns of Judah?”. Yahweh 
replied, “Go up!”. “Which one shall I go to?”. David asked. “To Hebron”, was the reply. 

2Sa 2:2 So David went up, with his two wives Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail widow of Nabal of Carmel. 

2Sa 2:3 In addition David brought up the men who were with him, each with his family, and they settled in the 
towns of Hebron. 

2Sa 2:4 The men of Judah came, and there they anointed David as king of the House of Judah. They told David 
that the people of Jabesh in Gilead had given Saul burial, 

2Sa 2:5 so David sent messengers to the people of Jabesh in Gilead. “May you be blessed by Yahweh”, he said, 
“for showing this faithful love to Saul your lord, and for burying him. 

2Sa 2:6 And now may Yahweh show faithful love and constancy towards you! I too shall treat you well because 
you have done this. 

2Sa 2:7 And now take courage and be men of valour. Saul your lord is dead, but the House of Judah has 
anointed me to be their king”. 

2Sa 2:8 Abner son of Ner, Saul’s army commander, had taken Ishbaal son of Saul and brought him over to 
Mahanaim. 

2Sa 2:9 He had made him king of Gilead, of the Asherites, of Jezreel, of Ephraim, of Benjamin and indeed of all 
Israel. 



2Sa 2:10 Ishbaal son of Saul was forty years old when he became king of Israel, and he reigned for two years. 
Only the House of Judah supported David. 

2Sa 2:1 1 The length of David’s reign over Judah in Hebron was seven years and six months. 

2Sa 2:12 Abner son of Ner, with the retainers of Ishbaal son of Saul, marched out from Mahanaim to Gibeon. 
2Sa 2:13 Joab son of Zeruiah, with David’s retainers, also took the field, encountering them at the pool of 
Gibeon. There they halted, one party on one side of the pool, and the other opposite. 

2Sa 2:14 Abner then said to Joab, “Let the men come forward and fight it out between us!”. Joab replied, “Let 
them come forward”. 

2Sa 2:15 So they came forward and were numbered off, twelve from Benjamin for Ishbaal son of Saul, and 
twelve of David’s retainers. 

2Sa 2:16 Each caught his opponent by the head and drove his sword into his side; and thus they all fell 
together. Hence the place was called the Field of Sides; it is at Gibeon. 

2Sa 2:17 That day a very fierce battle took place, and Abner and the men of Israel were beaten by David’s 
retainers. 

2Sa 2:18 The three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab, Abishai, and Asahel. Now Asahel could run like a wild 
gazelle. 

2Sa 2:19 Asahel chased Abner, not swerving to the right or left from pursuing him. 

2Sa 2:20 Abner turned and said, “Asahel, is that you?”. He replied, “It is”. 

2Sa 2:21 Abner said, “Turn to your right or your left, catch one of the men and take his spoil!”. But Asahel would 
not break off the pursuit. 

2Sa 2:22 Again Abner spoke to Asahel, “Stop following me, unless you want me to strike you to the ground; and 
then how could I look your brother Joab in the face?”. 

2Sa 2:23 But he refused to be diverted, so Abner struck him in the belly with the butt of his spear so that the 
shaft came out through his back; and he fell at his feet and died on the spot. On coming to the place where 
Asahel had fallen and died, everyone halted. 

2Sa 2:24 Joab and Abishai took up the pursuit of Abner and at sunset reached the Hill of Ammah, which is to 
the east of Giah on the road through the desert of Gibeon. 

2Sa 2:25 The Benjaminites gathered in close formation behind Abner and halted on the top of a hill. 

2Sa 2:26 Abner called out to Joab, “Is the sword to go on devouring for ever? Surely you see that this can only 
end in bitterness? How long will it be before you order those people to stop pursuing their brothers?”. 

2Sa 2:27 Joab replied, “As Yahweh lives, if you had not spoken, these men would not have given up the pursuit 
of their brothers until morning”. 

2Sa 2:28 Joab then sounded the trumpet and all the troops halted; they pursued Israel no further and fought no 
more. 

2Sa 2:29 All that night Abner and his men made their way through the Arabah; they crossed the Jordan and, 
marching throughout the morning, came to Mahanaim. 

2Sa 2:30 Joab, having stopped pursuing Abner, mustered the whole contingent; David’s retainers had lost 
nineteen men in addition to Asahel, 

2Sa 2:31 but had killed three hundred and sixty of Benjamin, Abner’s men. 

2Sa 2:32 They took up Asahel and buried him in his father’s tomb, which is at Bethlehem. Joab and his men 
then marched throughout the night, reaching Hebron at daybreak. 

2Sa 3:1 So the war dragged on between the House of Saul and the House of David, but David grew steadily 
stronger and the House of Saul steadily weaker. 

2Sa 3:2 The sons born to David at Hebron were: his first-born Amnon, by Ahinoam of Jezreel; 

2Sa 3:3 his second Chileab, by Abigail widow of Nabal of Carmel; the third Absalom son of Maacah, daughter of 
Talmai king of Geshur; 

2Sa 3:4 the fourth Adonijah son of Haggith; the fifth Shephatiah son of Abital; 

2Sa 3:5 the sixth Ithream, by David’s wife, Eglah. These were born to David at Hebron. 

2Sa 3:6 This is what took place during the war between the House of Saul and the House of David. Abner took 
complete control in the House of Saul. 

2Sa 3:7 Now, there was a concubine of Saul’s called Rizpah daughter of Aiah, and Abner took her. Ishbaal said 
to Abner, “Why have you slept with my father’s concubine?”. 

2Sa 3:8 At these words of Ishbaal, Abner flew into a rage. “Am I a dog’s head?”. he shouted. “Here am I, full of 
faithful love towards the House of Saul your father, his brothers and his friends, not leaving you to the hands of 
David, and now you find fault with me over a woman! 

2Sa 3:9 May God bring unnameable ills on Abner, and worse ones, too, if I do not bring about what Yahweh has 
sworn to David: 

2Sa 3:10 to take the sovereignty from the House of Saul, and establish David’s throne over Israel as well as 
Judah, from Dan to Beersheba!”. 



2Sa 3:1 1 Ishbaal dared not say a single word to Abner in reply, as he was afraid of him. 

2Sa 3:12 Abner sent messengers on his own behalf to say to David, . . and furthermore, come to an 
agreement with me and I will give you my support to win all Israel over to you”. 

2Sa 3:13 “Very well, 1 David said, “I will come to an agreement with you. I impose one condition however; you will 
not be admitted to my presence unless you bring me Michal, Saul’s daughter, when you come to see me”. 

2Sa 3:14 David then sent messengers to say to Ishbaal son of Saul, “Give me back my wife Michal, whom I 
acquired for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines”. 

2Sa 3:15 So Ishbaal sent for her to be taken from her husband Paltiel son of Laish. 

2Sa 3:16 Her husband set off with her and followed her, weeping as he went, as far as Bahurim; but Abner said 
to him, “Go back!”. and he went. 

2Sa 3:17 Now Abner conferred with the elders of Israel. “For a long time now”, he said, “you have wanted David 
as your king. 

2Sa 3:18 Now you must take action, since Yahweh has said of David, ‘By the hand of my servant David I shall 
deliver my people Israel from the clutches of the Philistines and all their enemies’”. 

2Sa 3:19 Abner also spoke to the men of Benjamin and then went to Hebron to tell David everything that had 
been agreed by Israel and the House of Benjamin. 

2Sa 3:20 Abner, accompanied by twenty men, came to David at Hebron, and David held a feast for Abner and 
the men who were with him. 

2Sa 3:21 Abner then said to David, “I must get up and go. I am going to rally all Israel to my lord the king, so that 
they will make an alliance with you, and you will reign over all that you desire”. So David allowed Abner to go, 
and he went unmolested. 

2Sa 3:22 David’s retainers were just then coming back with Joab from a raid, bringing a great quantity of booty 
with them. Abner was no longer with David at Hebron, since David had allowed him to go, and he had gone 
unmolested. 

2Sa 3:23 When Joab and the whole company with him had arrived, Joab was told, “Abner son of Ner has been 
to the king, and the king has allowed Abner to go away unmolested”. 

2Sa 3:24 Joab then went to the king and said, “What have you done? Abner comes to you and you let him go 
away and now he has gone-why? 

2Sa 3:25 You know Abner son of Ner! He came to trick you, to discover your every move, to find out what you 
are doing”. 

2Sa 3:26 Joab left David’s presence and sent messengers after Abner and these, unknown to David, brought 
him back from the storage-well at Sirah. 

2Sa 3:27 When Abner reached Hebron, Joab took him aside in the town-gate, as if to have a quiet word with 
him, and there struck him a mortal blow in the belly to avenge the blood of his brother Asahel. 

2Sa 3:28 Afterwards, when David heard of this, he said, “I and my kingdom are for ever innocent before Yahweh 
of the blood of Abner son of Ner; 

2Sa 3:29 may it fall on the head of Joab and on all his family! May the House of Joab never be free of men 
afflicted with haemorrhage or a virulent skin-disease, whose strength is in the distaff, who fall by the sword, who 
lack food”. 

2Sa 3:30 (Joab and his brother Abishai had murdered Abner because he killed their brother Asahel at the battle 
of Gibeon.) 

2Sa 3:31 David then said to Joab and the whole company with him, “Tear your clothes, put on sackcloth, and 
mourn over Abner”, and King David walked behind the bier. 

2Sa 3:32 They buried Abner at Hebron, and the king wept aloud on his grave, and the people all wept too. 

2Sa 3:33 The king made this lament over Abner: Should Abner have died as a brute dies? 

2Sa 3:34 Your hands were not tied, your feet not chained; you fell as a man falls at the hands of criminals. And 
all the people wept for him louder than ever. 

2Sa 3:35 The people then all tried to persuade David to have some food while it was still daylight, but David 
swore this oath, “May God bring unnameable ills on me, and worse ills, too, if I taste bread or anything whatever 
until the sun is down!”. 

2Sa 3:36 All the people took note of this and it pleased them; indeed, everything the king did pleased the 
people. 

2Sa 3:37 That day, all the people and all Israel understood that the king had had no part in the murder of Abner 
son of Ner. 

2Sa 3:38 The king said to his retainers, “Do you not realise that a prince, a great man, has fallen in Israel today? 
2Sa 3:39 I, though anointed king, am weak at present, and these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too strong for 
me. May Yahweh repay the criminal as his crime deserves!”. 

2Sa 4:1 When Saul’s son heard that Abner had died at Hebron, his heart failed him, and all Israel was alarmed. 
2Sa 4:2 Now, Saul’s son had two freebooting chieftains; one was called Baanah, the other Rechab. They were 



the sons of Rimmon of Beeroth, and Benjaminites — for Beeroth is regarded as belonging to Benjamin. 

2Sa 4:3 The people of Beeroth had taken refuge in Gittaim, where they have remained to this day as resident 
foreigners. 

2Sa 4:4 Jonathan son of Saul had a son with crippled feet. He was five years old when the news about Saul and 
Jonathan came from Jezreel. His nurse picked him up and fled but, as she hurried away, he fell and was lamed. 
His name was Meribbaal. 

2Sa 4:5 The sons of Rimmon of Beeroth, Rechab and Baanah, set out; they came to Ishbaal’s house at the 
hottest part of the day when he was taking his midday rest. 

2Sa 4:6 The woman who kept the door had been cleaning wheat and had drowsed off to sleep. 

2Sa 4:7 Rechab and his brother Baanah stole past her and entered the house, where he was lying on his bed in 
his bedroom. They struck him and killed him, then cut off his head and, taking the head with them, travelled all 
night by way of the Arabah. 

2Sa 4:8 They brought Ishbaal’s head to David at Hebron. “Here”, they said to the king, “is the head of Ishbaal 
son of Saul, your enemy, who meant to take your life. Yahweh has avenged my lord the king today on Saul and 
on his offspring”. 

2Sa 4:9 But David answered Rechab and his brother Baanah, the sons of Rimmon, by saying, “As Yahweh 
lives, who has rescued me from every danger, 

2Sa 4:10 when someöne told me, ‘Saul is dead!’. supposing himself to be bringing me good news, I seized and 
put him to death at Ziklag, and that was how I rewarded him for his news! 

2Sa 4:1 1 How much more when bandits have killed an upright man in his house, and on his bed! Am I not to 
demand an account of his blood from you, and rid the earth of you?”. 

2Sa 4:12 David then gave an order to the men, who put them to death, cut off their hands and feet, and hung 
them up beside the pool of Hebron. Ishbaal’s head they took and buried in Abner’s grave at Hebron. 

2Sa 5:1 All the tribes of Israel then came to David at Hebron and said, “Look, we are your own flesh and bone. 
2Sa 5:2 In days past when Saul was our king, it was you who led Israel on its campaigns, and to you it was that 
Yahweh promised, ‘You are to shepherd my people Israel and be leader of Israel’”. 

2Sa 5:3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and King David made a pact with them in 
Yahweh’s presence at Hebron, and they anointed David as king of Israel. 

2Sa 5:4 David was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned for forty years. 

2Sa 5:5 In Hebron he reigned over Judah for seven years and six months; then he reigned in Jerusalem over all 
Israel and Judah for thirty-three years. 

2Sa 5:6 The king and his men then marched on Jerusalem, on the Jebusites living in the territory. These said to 
David, “You will not get in here. The blind and the lame will hold you off”. (That is to say: David will never get in 
here.) 

2Sa 5:7 But David captured the citadel of Zion, that is, the City of David. 

2Sa 5:8 That day, David said, “Whoëver gets up the tunnel and kills a Jebusite . . ”. As for the blind and the 
lame, David hated them with his whole being. (Hence the saying: the blind and the lame may not enter the 
Temple.) 

2Sa 5:9 David went to live in the citadel and called it the City of David. David then built a wall round it, from the 
Millo inwards. 

2Sa 5:10 David grew stronger and stronger, and Yahweh, God of Sabaoth, was with him. 

2Sa 5:1 1 Hiram king of Tyre sent envoys to David, with cedar wood, carpenters and stone-cutters, who built 
David a palace. 

2Sa 5:12 David then knew that Yahweh had confirmed him as king of Israel and, for the sake of his people 
Israel, had extended his sovereignty. 

2Sa 5:13 After coming from Hebron, David took other concubines and wives in Jerusalem, and sons and 
daughters were born to him. 

2Sa 5:14 These are the names of those born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 

2Sa 5:15 Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia, 

2Sa 5:16 Elishama, Eliada, Eliphelet. 

2Sa 5:17 When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed as king of Israel, they all went up to seek 
him out. On hearing this, David went down to the stronghold. 

2Sa 5:18 When the Philistines arrived, they deployed in the Valley of the Rephaim. 

2Sa 5:19 David consulted Yahweh and asked, “Shall I attack the Philistines? Will you deliver them into my 
power?”. Yahweh replied to David, “Attack! I shall certainly deliver the Philistines into your power”. 

2Sa 5:20 Accordingly, David went to Baal-Perazim and there David defeated them. He said, “Yahweh has made 
a breach in my enemies for me, as though they had been breached by a flood”. This is why the place was given 
the name Baal-Perazim. 

2Sa 5:21 They had left their gods behind them there, and David and his men carried them off. 



2Sa 5:22 Again the Philistines invaded and deployed in the Valley of the Rephaim. 

2Sa 5:23 David consulted Yahweh, who replied, “Do not attack them from the front; go round to their rear and 
engage them opposite the balsam trees. 

2Sa 5:24 When you hear the sound of footsteps in the tops of the balsam trees, advance, for that will be 
Yahweh going out ahead of you to defeat the Philistine army”. 

2Sa 5:25 David did as Yahweh had ordered and beat the Philistines from Gibeon to the Pass of Gezer. 

2Sa 6:1 David again mustered all the picked troops of Israel, thirty thousand men. 

2Sa 6:2 Setting off with the whole force then with him, David went to Baalah of Judah, from there to bring up the 
ark of God, who bears the title “Yahweh Sabaoth, enthroned on the winged creatures”. 

2Sa 6:3 They transported the ark of God on a new cart and brought it out of Abinadab’s house which is on the 
hill. Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drove the cart, 

2Sa 6:4 Uzzah walked alongside the ark of God and Ahio went in front. 

2Sa 6:5 David and the whole House of Israel danced before Yahweh with all their might, singing to the 
accompaniment of harps, lyres, tambourines, sistrums and cymbals. 

2Sa 6:6 When they came to Nacon’s threshing-floor, Uzzah reached his hand out to the ark of God and 
steadied it, as the oxen were making it tilt. 

2Sa 6:7 This roused Yahweh’s anger against Uzzah, and for this crime God struck him down on the spot, and 
there he died beside the ark of God. 

2Sa 6:8 David resented Yahweh’s having broken out against Uzzah, and the place was given the name Perez- 
Uzzah, which it still has today. 

2Sa 6:9 That day David felt afraid of Yahweh. “How can the ark of Yahweh come to be with me?”. he said. 

2Sa 6:10 So David decided not to take the ark of Yahweh with him into the city of David but diverted it to the 
house of Obed-Edom of Gath. 

2Sa 6:1 1 The ark of Yahweh remained in the house of Obed-Edom of Gath for three months, and Yahweh 
blessed Obed-Edom and his whole family. 

2Sa 6:12 King David was informed that Yahweh had blessed Obed-Edom’s family and everything belonging to 
him on account of the ark of God. David accordingly went and, amid great rejoicing, brought the ark of God up 
from Obed-Edom’s house to the City of David. 

2Sa 6:13 When the bearers of the ark of Yahweh had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fat sheep. 

2Sa 6:14 And David danced whirling round before Yahweh with all his might, wearing a linen loincloth. 

2Sa 6:15 Thus with war cries and blasts on the horn, David and the entire House of Israel brought up the ark of 
Yahweh. 

2Sa 6:16 Now as the ark of Yahweh entered the City of David, Michal daughter of Saul was watching from the 
window and when she saw King David leaping and whirling round before Yahweh, the sight of him filled her with 
contempt. 

2Sa 6:17 They brought the ark of Yahweh in and put it in position, inside the tent which David had erected for it; 
and David presented burnt offerings and communion sacrifices in Yahweh’s presence. 

2Sa 6:18 And when David had finished presenting burnt offerings, he blessed the people in the name of 
Yahweh Sabaoth. 

2Sa 6:19 To all the people, to the whole multitude of Israelites, men and women, he then distributed to each a 
loaf of bread, a portion of dates and a raisin cake. Then the people all went back to their homes. 

2Sa 6:20 As David was coming back to bless his household, Michal daughter of Saul came out to meet him. 
“Much honour the king of Israel has won today”, she said, “making an exhibition of himself under the eyes of his 
servant-maids, making an exhibition of himself like a buffoon!”. 

2Sa 6:21 David replied to Michal, “I was dancing for Yahweh, not for them. As Yahweh lives, who chose me in 
preference to your father and his whole family to make me leader of Israel, Yahweh’s people, I shall dance 
before Yahweh and 

2Sa 6:22 lower myself even further than that. In your eyes I may be base, but by the maids you speak of, by 
them, I shall be held in honour!”. 

2Sa 6:23 And to the day of her death, Michal, daughter of Saul, had no children. 

2Sa 7:1 Once the king had settled into his palace and Yahweh had granted him rest from all the enemies 
surrounding him, 

2Sa 7:2 the king said to the prophet Nathan, “Look, I am living in a cedar-wood palace, while the ark of God is 
under awnings”. 

2Sa 7:3 Nathan said to the king, “Go and do whatever you have in mind, for Yahweh is with you”. 

2Sa 7:4 But that very night, the word of Yahweh came to Nathan: 

2Sa 7:5 “Go and tell my servant David, ‘Yahweh says this: Are you to build me a temple for me to live in? 

2Sa 7:6 I have never lived in a house from the day when I brought the Israelites out of Egypt until today, but 
have kept travelling with a tent for shelter. 



2Sa 7:7 In all my travels with all the Israelites, did I say to any of the judges of Israel, whom I had commanded 
to shepherd my people Israel: Why do you not build me a cedar-wood temple?’. 

2Sa 7:8 This is what you must say to my servant David, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth says this: I took you from the 
pasture, from following the sheep, to be leader of my people Israel; 

2Sa 7:9 I have been with you wherever you went; I have got rid of all your enemies for you. I am going to make 
your fame as great as the fame of the greatest on earth. 

2Sa 7:10 I am going to provide a place for my people Israel; I shall plant them there, and there they will live and 
never be disturbed again; nor will they be oppressed by the wicked any more, as they were in former times 
2Sa 7:1 1 ever since the time when I instituted judges to govern my people Israel; and I shall grant you rest from 
all your enemies. Yahweh furthermore tells you that he will make you a dynasty. 

2Sa 7:12 And when your days are over and you fall asleep with your ancestors, I shall appoint your heir, your 
own son to succeed you (and I shall make his sovereignty secure. 

2Sa 7:13 He will build a temple for my name) and I shall make his royal throne secure for ever. 

2Sa 7:14 I shall be a father to him and he a son to me; if he does wrong, I shall punish him with a rod such as 
men use, with blows such as mankind gives. 

2Sa 7:15 But my faithful love will never be withdrawn from him as I withdrew it from Saul, whom I removed from 
before you. 

2Sa 7:16 Your dynasty and your sovereignty will ever stand firm before me and your throne be for ever secure’. 

i 

2Sa 7:17 Nathan related all these words and this whole revelation to David. 

2Sa 7:18 King David then went in, sat down in Yahweh’s presence and said: “Who am I, Lord Yahweh, and what 
is my lineage, for you to have led me as far as this? 

2Sa 7:19 Yet, to you, Lord Yahweh, this seemed too little, and now you extend your promises for your servant’s 
family into the distant future. Such is human destiny, Lord Yahweh. 

2Sa 7:20 What more can David say to you, since you, Lord Yahweh, know all about your servant? 

2Sa 7:21 Because of your promise and since you were so inclined, you have had the generosity to reveal this to 
your servant. 

2Sa 7:22 That is why you are great, Lord Yahweh; there is no one like you, no God but you alone, as everything 
that we have heard confirms. 

2Sa 7:23 Is there another people on earth like your people, like Israel, whom a god proceeded to redeem, to 
make them his people and to make a name for himself by performing great and terrible things on their behalf, by 
driving out nations and their gods before his people? - 

2Sa 7:24 for you constituted your people Israel your own people for ever and you, Yahweh, became their God. 
2Sa 7:25 “Now, Yahweh God, may the promise which you have made for your servant and for his family stand 
firm forever as you have said, 

2Sa 7:26 so that your name will be exalted for ever and people will say, ‘Israel’s God is Yahweh Sabaoth’. Your 
servant David’s dynasty will be secure before you, 

2Sa 7:27 since you, Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, have disclosed to your servant, ‘I am going to build 
you a dynasty’. Hence, your servant has ventured to offer this prayer to you. 

2Sa 7:28 Yes, Lord Yahweh, you are God indeed, your words are true and you have made this generous 
promise to your servant. 

2Sa 7:29 What is more, you have deigned to bless your servant’s dynasty, so that it may remain for ever before 
you; for you, Lord Yahweh, have spoken; and may your servant’s dynasty be blessed with your blessing for 
ever”. 

2Sa 8:1 After this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them. From the grip of the Philistines he wrested 

2Sa 8:2 He also defeated the Moabites and, making them lie on the ground, measured them off by the line; he 
measured out two lines to be put to death and one full line to have their lives spared. The Moabites became 
David’s subjects and paid him tribute. 

2Sa 8:3 David defeated Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah, when the latter mounted an expedition to 
extend his power over the River. 

2Sa 8:4 David captured one thousand seven hundred charioteers and twenty thousand foot soldiers from him; 
David hamstrung all the chariot teams, keeping only a hundred of them. 

2Sa 8:5 The Aramaeans of Damascus came to the help of Hadadezer king of Zobah, but David killed twenty- 
two thousand of the Aramaeans. 

2Sa 8:6 David then imposed governors on Aram of Damascus, and the Aramaeans became David’s subjects 
and paid him tribute. Wherever David went, Yahweh gave him victory. 

2Sa 8:7 David took the golden shields carried by Hadadezer’s guards and brought them to Jerusalem. 

2Sa 8:8 From Betah and Berothai, towns belonging to Hadadezer, King David captured a great quantity of 



bronze. 

2Sa 8:9 When Tou king of Hamath heard that David had defeated Hadadezer’s entire army, 

2Sa 8:10 he sent his son Hadoram to King David to greet him and to congratulate him on having made war on 
Hadadezerand on having defeated him, since Hadadezerwas at war with Tou. Hadoram brought with him 
objects made of silver, gold and bronze, 

2Sa 8:1 1 which King David also consecrated to Yahweh, as he had already consecrated the silver and gold 
taken from all the nations which he had subjugated- 

2Sa 8:12 from Aram, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines and Amalek; and from the spoil of Hadadezer son of 
Rehob, king of Zobah. 

2Sa 8:13 David became famous when he came home from defeating the Edomites in the Valley of Salt — 
eighteen thousand of them. 

2Sa 8:14 He imposed governors on Edom and all the Edomites became David’s subjects. Wherever David 
went, Yahweh gave him victory. 

2Sa 8:15 David ruled over all Israel, administering law and justice to all his people. 

2Sa 8:16 Joab son of Zeruiah was in command of the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was herald; 

2Sa 8:17 Zadok and Abiathar son of Ahimelech, son of Ahitub, were priests; Seraiah was secretary; 

2Sa 8:18 Benaiah son of Jehoiada was in command of the Cherethites and Pelethites; David’s sons were 
priests. 

2Sa 9:1 David asked, “Is there anyone belonging to Saul’s family left, to whom I might show faithful love for 
Jonathan’s sake?”. 

2Sa 9:2 Now Saul’s family had a servant whose name was Ziba. When he had been summoned to David, the 
king said, “Are you Ziba?”. “At your service”, he replied. 

2Sa 9:3 The king said, “Is there no one left, belonging to Saul’s family, for me to treat with God’s own faithful 
love?”. Ziba said to the king, “There is still one of Jonathan’s sons. He has crippled feet”. 

2Sa 9:4 The king asked “Where is he?”. Ziba replied, “He is living in the household of Machir son of Ammiel, at 
Lo-Debar.’ 

2Sa 9:5 So King David sent for him to be fetched from the house of Machir son of Ammiel at Lo-Debar. 

2Sa 9:6 On entering David’s presence, Meribbaal son of Jonathan, son of Saul, fell on his face and prostrated 
himself. David said, “Meribbaal!”. He replied, “Here I am, at your service”. 

2Sa 9:7 David then said, “Do not be afraid; I will indeed treat you with faithful love for your father Jonathan’s 
sake. I shall restore all your grandfather Saul’s estates to you, and you will always eat at my table”. 

2Sa 9:8 Meribbaal prostrated himself and said, “Who is your servant, for you to show favour to a dead dog like 
me?”. 

2Sa 9:9 The king then summoned Saul’s servant Ziba and said, “Everything belonging to Saul and his family, I 
give to your master’s son. 

2Sa 9:10 You must work the land for him, you and your sons and your slaves; you must harvest the produce to 
provide food for your master’s family to eat. But Meribbaal, your master’s son, will always take his own meals at 
my table”. Now, Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty slaves. 

2Sa 9:1 1 Ziba said to the king, “Your servant will do everything my lord the king has ordered his servant”. So 
Meribbaal ate at David’s table like one of the king’s sons. 

2Sa 9:12 Meribbaal had a young son whose name was Micha. All the people living in Ziba’s household entered 
Meribbaal’s service. 

2Sa 9:13 Meribbaal lived in Jerusalem, since he always ate at the king’s table. He was crippled in both feet. 

2Sa 10:1 After this, when the king of the Ammonites died and his son Hanun succeeded him, 

2Sa 10:2 David thought, “I shall show Hanun son of Nahash the same faithful love as his father showed me”. 
And David sent his representatives to offer him condolences over his father. But, when David’s representatives 
reached the Ammonites’ country, 

2Sa 10:3 the Ammonite princes said to Hanun their master, “Do you really think David means to honour your 
father when he sends you messengers with sympathy? On the contrary, the reason why David has sent his 
representatives to you is to explore the city, to reconnoitre and so overthrow it”. 

2Sa 1 0:4 Whereupon Hanun seized David’s representatives, shaved off half their beards, cut their clothes off 
halfway up, at their buttocks, and sent them away. 

2Sa 10:5 When David was told, he sent someöne to meet them, since the men were overcome with shame. 
“Stay in Jericho”, the king said, “until your beards have grown again, and come back then”. 

2Sa 10:6 When the Ammonites realised that they had antagonised David, they sent agents to hire twenty 
thousand foot soldiers from the Aramaeans of Beth-Rehob and the Aramaeans of Zobah, one thousand men 
from the king of Maacah and twelve thousand men from the prince of Tob. 

2Sa 10:7 When David heard this, he sent Joab with the whole army, the champions. 

2Sa 1 0:8 The Ammonites marched out and drew up their line of battle at the city gate, while the Aramaeans of 



Zobah and of Rehob and the men of Tob and Maacah kept their distance in the open country. 

2Sa 10:9 Joab, seeing that he had to fight on two fronts, to his front and to his rear, chose the best of Israel’s 
picked men and drew them up in line facing the Aramaeans. 

2Sa 10:10 He entrusted the rest of the army to his brother Abishai, and drew them up in line facing the 
Ammonites. 

2Sa 10:11 “If the Aramaeans prove too strong for me”, he said, “you must come to my help; if the Ammonites 
prove too strong for you, I shall come to yours. 

2Sa 10:12 Be brave! Let us acquit ourselves like men for the sake of our people and for the cities of our God. 
And let Yahweh do as he thinks right!”. 

2Sa 10:13 Joab and the force with him joined battle with the Aramaeans, who fled at his onslaught. 

2Sa 10:14 When the Ammonites saw that the Aramaeans had fled, they too fled from Abishai and withdrew into 
the city. Hence, Joab broke off his campaign against the Ammonites and returned to Jerusalem. 

2Sa 10:15 The Aramaeans, realising that Israel had got the better of them, concentrated their forces. 

2Sa 10:16 Hadadezer sent messengers and mobilised the Aramaeans living on the other side of the river; and 
these arrived at Helam, with Shobach the commander of Hadadezer’s army, at their head. 

2Sa 10:17 David, being informed of this, mustered all Israel, crossed the Jordan and arrived at Helam. The 
Aramaeans drew up in line facing David and engaged him. 

2Sa 10:18 But the Aramaeans fled from Israel, and David killed seven hundred of their chariot teams and forty 
thousand men; he also cut down Shobach the commander of their army, who died there. 

2Sa 10:19 When all Hadadezer’s vassal kings saw that Israel had got the better of them, they made peace with 
the Israelites and became their subjects. The Aramaeans were afraid to give any more help to the Ammonites. 
2Sa 11:1 At the turn of the year, at the time when kings go campaigning, David sent Joab and with him his 
guards and all Israel. They massacred the Ammonites and laid siege to Rabbah-of-the-Ammonites. David, 
however, remained in Jerusalem. 

2Sa 1 1 :2 It happened towards evening when David had got up from resting and was strolling on the palace roof, 
that from the roof he saw a woman bathing; the woman was very beautiful. 

2Sa 1 1 :3 David made enquiries about this woman and was told, “Why, that is Bathsheba daughter of Eliam and 
wife of Uriah the Hittite”. 

2Sa 1 1 :4 David then sent messengers to fetch her. She came to him, and he lay with her, just after she had 
purified herself from her period. She then went home again. 

2Sa 1 1 :5 The woman conceived and sent word to David, “I am pregnant”. 

2Sa 1 1 :6 David then sent word to Joab, “Send me Uriah the Hittite”, whereupon Joab sent Uriah to David. 

2Sa 11:7 When Uriah reached him, David asked how Joab was and how the army was and how the war was 
going. 

2Sa 1 1 :8 David then said to Uriah, “Go down to your house and wash your feet”. Uriah left the palace and was 
followed by a present from the king’s table. 

2Sa 1 1 :9 Uriah, however, slept at the palace gate with all his master’s bodyguard and did not go down to his 
house. 

2Sa 11:10 This was reported to David; “Uriah”, they said “has not gone down to his house”. So David asked 
Uriah, “Haven’t you just arrived from the journey? Why didn’t you go down to your house?”. 

2Sa 11:11 To which Uriah replied, “The ark, Israel and Judah are lodged in huts; my master Joab and my lord’s 
guards are camping in the open. Am I to go to my house, then, and eat and drink and sleep with my wife? As 
Yahweh lives, and as you yourself live, I shall do no such thing!”. 

2Sa 11:12 David then said to Uriah, “Stay on here today; tomorrow I shall send you off”. So Uriah stayed that 
day in Jerusalem. 

2Sa 11:13 The next day, David invited him to eat and drink in his presence and made him drunk. In the evening, 
Uriah went out and bedded down with his master’s bodyguard, but did not go down to his house. 

2Sa 11:14 Next morning David wrote a letter to Joab and sent it by Uriah. 

2Sa 11:15 In the letter he wrote, “Put Uriah out in front where the fighting is fiercest and then fall back, so that 
he gets wounded and killed”. 

2Sa 11:16 Joab, then besieging the city, stationed Uriah at a point where he knew that there would be tough 
fighters. 

2Sa 11:17 The people of the city sallied out and engaged Joab; there were casualties in the army, among 
David’s guards, and Uriah the Hittite was killed as well. 

2Sa 11:18 Joab sent David a full account of the battle. 

2Sa 11:19 To the messenger he gave this order: “When you have finished telling the king all about the battle, 
2Sa 1 1 :20 if the king’s anger is aroused and he says, ‘Why did you go near the town to give battle? Didn’t you 
know that they would shoot from the ramparts? 

2Sa 1 1 :21 Who killed Abimelech son of Jerubbaal? Wasn’t it a woman who dropped a millstone on him from the 



ramparts, causing his death at Thebez? Why did you go near the ramparts?’. you are to say, ‘Your servant Uriah 
the Hittite is dead too’”. 

2Sa 1 1 :22 So the messenger set off and, on his arrival, told David everything that Joab had instructed him to 
say. David flew into a rage with Joab and said to the messenger, “Why did you go near the ramparts? Who killed 
Abimelech son of Jerubbaal? Wasn’t it a woman who dropped a millstone on him from the ramparts, causing his 
death at Thebez? Why did you go near the ramparts?”. 

2Sa 1 1 :23 The messenger replied to David, “Their men had won an initial advantage and then came out to 
engage us in the open. We then drove them back into the gateway, 

2Sa 1 1 :24 but the archers shot at your retainers from the ramparts; some of the king’s retainers lost their lives, 
and your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead too”. 

2Sa 1 1 :25 David then said to the messenger, “Say this to Joab, ‘Do not take the matter to heart; the sword 
devours now one and now another. Attack the town in greater force and destroy it’. That will encourage him”. 

2Sa 1 1 :26 When Uriah’s wife heard that her husband Uriah was dead, she mourned for her husband. 

2Sa 1 1 :27 When the period of mourning was over, David sent to have her brought to his house; she became his 
wife and bore him a son. But what David had done displeased Yahweh. 

2Sa 12:1 Yahweh sent the prophet Nathan to David. He came to him and said: In the same town were two men, 
one rich, the other poor. 

2Sa 12:2 The rich man had flocks and herds in great abundance; 

2Sa 12:3 the poor man had nothing but a ewe lamb, only a single little one which he had bought. He fostered it 
and it grew up with him and his children, eating his bread, drinking from his cup, sleeping in his arms; it was like 
a daughter to him. 

2Sa 12:4 When a traveller came to stay, the rich man would not take anything from his own flock or herd to 
provide for the wayfarer who had come to him. Instead, he stole the poor man’s lamb and prepared that for his 
guest. 

2Sa 12:5 David flew into a great rage with the man. “As Yahweh lives”, he said to Nathan “the man who did this 
deserves to die. 

2Sa 12:6 For doing such a thing and for having shown no pity, he shall make fourfold restitution for the lamb”. 
2Sa 12:7 Nathan then said to David, “You are the man! Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘I anointed you king of 
Israel, I saved you from Saul’s clutches, 

2Sa 12:8 I gave you your master’s household and your master’s wives into your arms, I gave you the House of 
Israel and the House of Judah; and, if this is still too little, I shall give you other things as well. 

2Sa 12:9 Why did you show contempt for Yahweh, by doing what displeases him? You put Uriah the Hittite to 
the sword, you took his wife to be your wife, causing his death by the sword of the Ammonites. 

2Sa 12:10 For this, your household will never be free of the sword, since you showed contempt for me and took 
the wife of Uriah the Hittite, to make her your wife’. 

2Sa 12:11 “Yahweh says this, ‘Out of your own household I shall raise misfortune for you. Before your very eyes 
I shall take your wives and give them to your neighbour, who will lie with your wives in broad daylight. 

2Sa 12:12 You have worked in secret, but I shall work this for all Israel to see, in broad daylight’”. 

2Sa 12:13 David said to Nathan, “I have sinned against Yahweh”. Nathan then said to David, “Yahweh, for his 
part, forgives your sin; you are not to die. 

2Sa 12:14 But, since you have outraged Yahweh by doing this, the child born to you will die”. 

2Sa 12:15 And Nathan went home. Yahweh struck the child which Uriah’s wife had borne to David and it fell 
gravely ill. 

2Sa 12:16 David pleaded with Yahweh for the child; he kept a strict fast and went home and spent the night 
lying on the ground, covered with sacking. 

2Sa 12:17 The officials of his household stood round him, intending to get him off the ground, but he refused, 
nor would he take food with them. 

2Sa 12:18 On the seventh day the child died. David’s retinue were afraid to tell him that the child was dead. 
“Even when the child was alive”, they thought, “we reasoned with him and he would not listen to us. How can we 
tell him that the child is dead? He will do something desperate”. 

2Sa 12:19 David, however, noticed that his retinue were whispering among themselves, and realised that the 
child was dead. “Is the child dead?”. he asked the officers. They replied, “He is dead.’ 

2Sa 12:20 David got off the ground, bathed and anointed himself and put on fresh clothes. Then he went into 
Yahweh’s sanctuary and prostrated himself. On returning to his house, he asked to be served with food and ate 
it. 

2Sa 12:21 His retinue said, “Why are you acting like this? When the child was alive, you fasted and wept; now 
that the child is dead, you get up and take food!”. 

2Sa 12:22 “When the child was alive”, he replied, “I fasted and wept because I kept thinking, ‘Who knows? 
Perhaps Yahweh will take pity on me and the child will live’. 



2Sa 12:23 But now that he is dead, why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him but he 
cannot come back to me”. 

2Sa 12:24 David consoled his wife Bathsheba. He went to her and slept with her. She conceived and gave birth 
to a son, whom she called Solomon. Yahweh loved him 

2Sa 12:25 and made this known by means of the prophet Nathan, who named him Jedidiah, as Yahweh had 
instructed. 

2Sa 12:26 Joab assaulted Rabbah-of-the-Ammonites and captured the royal town. 

2Sa 12:27 He then sent messengers to tell David, “I have assaulted Rabbah and captured the water supply. 

2Sa 12:28 So now muster the rest of the army, lay siege to the town and take it, or I will take it and the town will 
be called after me!”. 

2Sa 12:29 So David mustered the whole army and marched on Rabbah; he assaulted the town and captured it. 
2Sa 12:30 He took the crown off Milcom’s head; it weighed one talent of gold, and in it was set a precious stone 
which went on David’s head instead. He carried off great quantities of booty from the town”. 

2Sa 12:31 And he expelled its inhabitants, setting them to work with saws, iron picks and iron axes, employing 
them at brickmaking. He treated all the Ammonite towns in the same way. David and the whole army returned to 
Jerusalem. 

2Sa 13:1 After this, the following events took place. Absalom son of David had a beautiful sister whose name 
was Tamar; Amnon son of David fell in love with her. 

2Sa 1 3:2 Amnon was so obsessed with his sister Tamar that it made him ill, since she was a virgin and Amnon 
thought it impossible to do anything to her. 

2Sa 1 3:3 But Amnon had a friend called Jonadab son of Shimeah, David’s brother, and Jonadab was a very 
shrewd man. 

2Sa 13:4 “Son of the king”, he said, “tell me why, morning after morning, you look so worn? Won’t you tell me?”. 
Amnon replied, “I am in love with Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister”. 

2Sa 13:5 Then Jonadab said, “Take to your bed, pretend to be ill and, when your father comes to visit you, say, 
‘Please let my sister Tamar come and give me something to eat; let her prepare the food where I can see. What 
she gives me I shall eat’”. 

2Sa 13:6 So Amnon lay down and pretended to be ill. The king then came to visit him and Amnon said to the 
king, “Please let my sister Tamar come and make a cake or two where I can watch. What she gives me, I shall 
eat”. 

2Sa 1 3:7 David then sent word to Tamar at the palace, “Go to your brother Amnon’s house and prepare some 
food for him”. 

2Sa 13:8 Tamar went to the house of her brother Amnon who was lying there in bed. She took dough and 
kneaded it, and she made some cakes while he watched, and baked the cakes. 

2Sa 13:9 She then took the pan and dished them up in front of him, but he refused to eat. Amnon said, “Let 
everyone leave me!”. So everyone withdrew. 

2Sa 13:10 Amnon then said to Tamar, “Bring the food to the inner room, so that I can eat what you give me”. So 
Tamar took the cakes which she had made and brought them to her brother Amnon in the inner room. 

2Sa 13:11 And as she was offering the food to him, he caught hold of her and said, “Come to bed with me, 
sister!”. 

2Sa 13:12 She replied, “No, brother! Do not force me! This is no way to behave in Israel. Do not do anything so 
disgraceful! 

2Sa 13:13 Wherever should I go? I should be marked with this shame, while you would become disgraced in 
Israel. Why not go and speak to the king? He will not refuse to give me to you”. 

2Sa 13:14 But he would not listen to her; he overpowered her and raped her. 

2Sa 13:15 Amnon was then seized with extreme hatred for her; the hatred he now felt for her was greater than 
his earlier love. “Get up and go!”. he said. 

2Sa 13:16 She said, “No, brother! To send me away would be worse than the other wrong you have done me!”. 
But he would not listen to her. 

2Sa 13:17 He called his personal servant. “Rid me of this woman!”. he said. “Throw her out and bolt the door 
behind her!”. 

2Sa 13:18 (She was wearing a magnificent dress, for this was what the king’s unmarried daughters wore in 
days gone by.) So the servant put her out and bolted the door behind her. 

2Sa 13:19 Tamar put dust on her head, tore the magnificent dress which she was wearing, laid her hand on her 
head, and went away, crying aloud as she went. 

2Sa 13:20 Her brother Absalom said to her, “Has Amnon your brother been with you? Sister, be quiet; he is your 
brother; do not take the matter to heart!”. Tamar, however, went back to her brother Absalom’s house 
inconsolable. 

2Sa 13:21 When King David heard the whole story, he was very angry; but he had no wish to harm his son 



Amnon, whom he loved because he was his first-born. 

2Sa 13:22 Absalom, however, would not so much as speak to Amnon, since he hated Amnon for having raped 
his sister Tamar. 

2Sa 13:23 Two years later, when Absalom had the sheep-shearers at Baal-Hazor, which is near Ephraim, he 
invited all the king’s sons. 

2Sa 1 3:24 Absalom went to the king and said, “Now sir, your servant has the sheep-shearers. Will the king and 
his retinue be pleased to come with your servant?”. 

2Sa 13:25 “No, my son”, the king replied, “we must not all come and be a burden to you”. And though Absalom 
was insistent, he would not go but dismissed him. 

2Sa 1 3:26 Absalom persisted, “Then at least let my brother Amnon come with us”. The king said, “Why should he 
go with you?”. 

2Sa 13:27 On Absalom’s insistence, however, he let Amnon and all the king’s sons to go with him. Absalom 
prepared a royal banquet 

2Sa 1 3:28 and then gave this order to the servants, “Listen carefully; when Amnon’s heart is merry with wine 
and I say, ‘Strike Amnon down’, then kill him. Don’t be afraid. Have I not myself given you the order? Use your 
strength and show your mettle!”. 

2Sa 1 3:29 Absalom’s servants treated Amnon as Absalom had ordered. The king’s sons all leapt to their feet, 
mounted their mules and fled. 

2Sa 13:30 While they were on the road, word reached David, “Absalom has killed all the king’s sons; not one of 
them is left”. 

2Sa 1 3:31 The king stood up, tore his clothes and threw himself on the ground. All his officers tore their clothes 
too. 

2Sa 13:32 Jonadab son of Shimeah, David’s brother, then spoke up and said, “Do not let my lord take to heart 
the report that all the young men, the king’s sons, have been killed, since only Amnon is dead: for Absalom has 
been promising himself to do this since the day when Amnon raped his sister Tamar. 

2Sa 13:33 So my lord the king must not imagine that all the king’s sons are dead; only Amnon is dead 
2Sa 13:34 and Absalom has fled”. The man on sentry duty looked up and saw a large troop coming along the 
road from Bahurim. The sentry came to tell the king, “I have seen some people coming down the Bahurim road 
on the mountainside”. 

2Sa 13:35 Jonadab then said to the king, “These are the king’s sons arriving: what your servant said is exactly 
what happened”. 

2Sa 13:36 He had scarcely finished speaking when the king’s sons arrived and wept aloud; the king and all his 
retinue wept aloud too. 

2Sa 13:37 Absalom had gone to Talmai son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. The king mourned for his son every 
day. 

2Sa 13:38 When Absalom had gone to Geshur, he stayed there for three years. 

2Sa 1 3:39 Once the king was consoled over Amnon’s death, his anger against Absalom subsided. 

2Sa 14:1 Now, Joab son of Zeruiah observed that the king was favourably inclined to Absalom. 

2Sa 14:2 Joab therefore sent to Tekoa for a wise woman. “Pretend to be in mourning”, he said. “Dress yourself in 
mourning, do not perfume yourself; act like a woman who has long been mourning for the dead. 

2Sa 14:3 Then go to the king and say this to him”. And Joab put the words into her mouth which she was to say. 
2Sa 14:4 So the woman of Tekoa went to the king and, falling on her face to the ground, prostrated herself. 
“Help, my lord king!”. she said. 

2Sa 14:5 The king said, “What is the matter?”. “As you see”, she replied, “I am a widow; my husband is dead. 

2Sa 14:6 Your servant had two sons and out in the fields, where there was no one to intervene, they had a 
quarrel. And one of them struck the other one and killed him. 

2Sa 14:7 And now the whole clan has risen against your servant. ‘Give up the man who killed his brother’, they 
say, ‘so that we can put him to death, to atone for the life of the brother whom he has murdered; and thus we 
shall destroy the heir as well’. By this means, they will extinguish the ember still left to me, leaving my husband 
neither name nor survivor on the face of the earth”. 

2Sa 14:8 Then the king said to the woman, “Go home; I myself shall give orders about your case”. 

2Sa 14:9 The woman of Tekoa said to the king, “My lord king! May the guilt be on me and on my family; the king 
and his throne are innocent of it”. 

2Sa 14:10 “Bring me the man who threatened you”, the king replied, “and he shall never hurt you again”. 

2Sa 14:11 She then said, “Let the king be pleased to pronounce the name of Yahweh your God, so that the 
avenger of blood may not do greater harm and destroy my son”. “As Yahweh lives”, he said, “not one of your 
son’s hairs shall fall to the ground!”. 

2Sa 14:12 Then the woman said, “Permit your servant to say something else to my lord the king”. “Go on”, he 
said. 



2Sa 14:13 The woman said, “Why then has the king, who by giving this verdict has condemned himself, 
conceived the idea, against God’s people’s interests, of not bringing home the son whom he has banished? 

2Sa 14:14 We are all mortal; we are like water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again, nor does 
God raise up a corpse; let the king therefore make plans for his banished son not to remain far away from him in 
exile. 

2Sa 14:15 “Now, the reason why I came to speak about this to my lord the king is that I was being intimidated, 
and your servant thought, ‘I shall speak to the king; perhaps the king will do what his servant asks. 

2Sa 14:16 Surely the king will consent to save his servant from the clutches of the man who is trying to cut both 
me and my son off from God’s heritage. 

2Sa 14:17 Let a word from my lord the king, restore the peace!’. your servant thought, ‘for my lord the king is 
like the Angel of God in understanding good and evil’. May Yahweh your God be with you!”. 

2Sa 14:18 Replying to the woman, the king said, “Now do not evade the question which I am going to ask you”. 
The woman said, “Let my lord the king ask his question”. 

2Sa 14:19 “Is not Joab’s hand behind you in all this?”. the king asked. The woman replied, “As you live, my lord 
king, I cannot escape what my lord the king says, either to right or to left. Yes, it was your servant Joab who 
gave me my orders; he put all these words into your servant’s mouth. 

2Sa 14:20 Your servant Joab did this to approach the matter indirectly, but my lord has the wisdom of the Angel 
of God; he knows everything that happens on earth!”. 

2Sa 14:21 The king then said to Joab, “Very well, the suit is granted. Go and bring the young man Absalom 
back”. 

2Sa 14:22 Joab fell on his face to the ground, prostrated himself and blessed the king. “My lord king”, Joab said, 
“today your servant knows that he has won your favour, since the king has done what his servant asked”. 

2Sa 14:23 Joab then set off, went to Geshur, and brought Absalom back to Jerusalem. 

2Sa 14:24 The king, however, said, “Let him retire to his own house; he is not to appear in my presence”. So 
Absalom retired to his own house and was not received by the king. 

2Sa 14:25 In all Israel there was no one more praised for his beauty than Absalom; from the sole of his foot to 
the crown of his head, he could not be faulted. 

2Sa 14:26 When he cut his hair — he shaved it once a year because his hair got too heavy — he would weigh 
the hair: two hundred shekels, king’s weight. 

2Sa 14:27 To Absalom were born three sons and one daughter called Tamar; she was a beautiful woman. 

2Sa 14:28 Absalom lived in Jerusalem for two years without being received by the king. 

2Sa 14:29 Absalom then summoned Joab, intending to send him to the king, but Joab would not come to him. 
He sent for him a second time, but still he would not come. 

2Sa 14:30 At this, Absalom said to his retainers, “Look, Joab’s field is next to mine and he has barley in it; go 
and set it on fire”. Absalom’s retainers set fire to the field. 

2Sa 14:31 Joab then stirred himself, went to Absalom in his house and asked, “Why have your retainers set my 
field on fire?”. 

2Sa 14:32 Absalom replied to Joab, “Look, I sent word to you: Come here, so that I can send you to the king to 
say, ‘Why come back from Geshur? Better for me to have been there still!’. Now I want to be received by the 
king, and if I am guilty, let him put me to death!”. 

2Sa 14:33 Joab went to the king and told him this. He then summoned Absalom, who prostrated himself with his 
face to the ground before the king. And the king kissed Absalom. 

2Sa 15:1 After this, Absalom procured a chariot and horses, with fifty men to run ahead of him. 

2Sa 15:2 He would get up early and stand beside the road leading to the city gate; and whenever a man with 
some lawsuit had to come before the king’s tribunal, Absalom would call out to him and ask, “Which town are you 
from?”. If he answered, “Your servant is from one of the tribes of Israel”, 

2Sa 1 5:3 then Absalom would say, “Look, your case is sound and just, but not one of the king’s deputies will 
listen to you”. 

2Sa 15:4 Absalom would say, “Oh, who will appoint me judge in the land? Then anyone with a lawsuit or a plea 
could come to me and I should see he had justice!”. 

2Sa 15:5 And whenever anyone came up to him to prostrate himself, he would stretch out his hand, draw him to 
him and kiss him. 

2Sa 15:6 Absalom acted like this with every Israelite who appealed to the king’s tribunal, and so Absalom won 
the Israelites’ hearts. 

2Sa 15:7 When four years had gone by, Absalom said to the king, “Allow me to go to Hebron and fulfil the vow 
which I have made to Yahweh; 

2Sa 1 5:8 for, when I was in Geshur, in Aram, your servant made this vow, ‘If Yahweh brings me back to 
Jerusalem, I shall pay my devotions to Yahweh in Hebron’”. 

2Sa 1 5:9 The king said to him, “Go in peace”. So he set off and went to Hebron. 



2Sa 15:10 Absalom sent couriers throughout the tribes of Israel to say, “When you hear the trumpet sound, you 
are to say, ‘Absalom is king at Hebron!’”. 

2Sa 15:11 With Absalom went two hundred men from Jerusalem; they had been invited and had gone in all 
innocence, unaware of what was going on. 

2Sa 15:12 Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counsellor, from Giloh his town, and had him with 
him while offering the sacrifices. The conspiracy grew in strength, since Absalom’s supporters grew in number. 
2Sa 15:13 A messenger came and told David, “The men of Israel have shifted their allegiance to Absalom”. 

2Sa 15:14 David said to all his retinue then with him in Jerusalem, “Up, let us flee, or we shall not escape from 
Absalom! Leave as quickly as you can, in case he mounts a sudden attack, overcomes us and puts the city to 
the sword”. 

2Sa 15:15 The king’s retinue replied, “Whatever my lord the king decides, we are at your service”. 

2Sa 15:16 The king set out on foot with his whole household, leaving ten concubines to look after the palace. 
2Sa 15:17 The king set out on foot with everyone following, and they halted at the last house. 

2Sa 15:18 All his officers stood at his side. All the Cherethites and all the Pelethites, with Ittai and all the six 
hundred Gittites who had come in his retinue from Gath, marched past the king. 

2Sa 15:19 The king said to Ittai the Gittite, “You, why are you coming with us? Go back and stay with the king, 
for you are a foreigner, indeed an exile from your homeland. 

2Sa 15:20 You arrived only yesterday; should I take you wandering with us today, when I do not know myself 
where I am going? Go back, take your fellow countrymen with you, and may Yahweh show you mercy and 
faithful love!”. 

2Sa 15:21 Ittai replied to the king, “As Yahweh lives, and as my lord the king lives, wherever my lord the king 
may be, for death or life, your servant will be there too”. 

2Sa 15:22 David then said to Ittai, “Go ahead, march past!”. And Ittai of Gath marched past with all his men and 
with all his children too. 

2Sa 15:23 The entire population was weeping aloud as the king stood in the bed of the Kidron and everyone 
marched past him, making for the desert. 

2Sa 15:24 Zadok was there too, and all the Levites with him, carrying the ark of God. They set the ark of God 
down beside Abiathar until everyone had finished marching out of the town. 

2Sa 15:25 The king then said to Zadok, “Take the ark of God back into the city. Should I win Yahweh’s favour, 
he will bring me back and allow me to see it and its tent once more. 

2Sa 15:26 But should he say, ‘You displease me’, here I am: let him treat me as he sees fit”. 

2Sa 15:27 The king said to Zadok the priest, “Look, you and Abiathar go back quietly into the city, with your two 
sons, your own son Ahimaaz and Jonathan son of Abiathar. 

2Sa 15:28 You see, I shall wait in the passes of the desert plain until word comes from you bringing me news”. 
2Sa 1 5:29 So Zadok and Abiathar took the ark of God back to Jerusalem and stayed there. 

2Sa 1 5:30 David then made his way up the Mount of Olives, weeping as he went, his head covered and his feet 
bare. And all the people with him had their heads covered and made their way up, weeping as they went. 

2Sa 15:31 David was then informed that Ahithophel was among the conspirators with Absalom. David said, “I 
beg you, Yahweh, turn Ahithophel’s advice to folly”. 

2Sa 15:32 As David reached the summit, where God is worshipped, he saw Hushai the Archite, his friend, 
coming to meet him with his tunic torn and with earth on his head. 

2Sa 15:33 David said, “If you go along with me, you will be a burden to me. 

2Sa 15:34 But if you go back to the city and say to Absalom, ‘I am at your service, my lord king; once I was in 
your father’s service, but now I shall serve you’, you will be able to thwart Ahithophel’s advice for me. 

2Sa 15:35 Surely the priests Zadok and Abiathar will be with you? Anything you hear from the palace you must 
report to the priests Zadok and Abiathar. 

2Sa 15:36 You see, their two sons are there with them, Zadok’s son Ahimaaz, and Abiathar’s son Jonathan; 
through these, you will send me word of everything you hear”. 

2Sa 1 5:37 Hushai, David’s friend, entered the city just as Absalom was reaching Jerusalem. 

2Sa 16:1 When David had passed a little beyond the summit, Meribbaal’s retainer, Ziba, met him with a pair of 
donkeys, saddled and laden with two hundred loaves of bread, a hundred bunches of raisins, a hundred of the 
season’s fruits, and a skin of wine. 

2Sa 16:2 The king said to Ziba, “What are you going to do with that?”. “The donkeys”, Ziba replied, “are for the 
king’s family to ride, the bread and the fruit for the soldiers to eat, the wine is for drinking by those who get 
exhausted in the desert”. 

2Sa 16:3 The king asked “And where is your master’s son?”. Ziba replied to the king, “Why, he has stayed in 
Jerusalem because, he says, ‘Today, the House of Israel will give me back my father’s kingdom’”. 

2Sa 16:4 Then the king said to Ziba, “Everything owned by Meribbaal is yours”. Ziba said, “I prostrate myself! 
May I be worthy of your favour, my lord king!”. 



2Sa 16:5 As David was reaching Bahurim, out came a man of the same clan as Saul’s family. His name was 
Shimei son of Gera and, as he came, he uttered curse after curse 

2Sa 16:6 and threw stones at David and at all King David’s retinue, even though the whole army and all the 
champions formed an escort round the king on either side. 

2Sa 1 6:7 The words of his curse were these, “Off with you, off with you, man of blood, scoundrel! 

2Sa 16:8 Yahweh has paid you back for all the spilt blood of the House of Saul whose sovereignty you have 
usurped; and Yahweh has transferred the sovereign power to Absalom your son. Now your wickedness has 
overtaken you, man of blood that you are”. 

2Sa 16:9 Abishai son of Zeruiah said to the king, “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go 
over and cut his head off”. 

2Sa 16:10 But the king replied, “What concern is my business to you, sons of Zeruiah? Let him curse! If Yahweh 
has said to him, ‘Curse David!’. what right has anyone to say, ‘Why have you done so?’”. 

2Sa 16:11 David said to Abishai and all his retinue, “Why, the son sprung from my own body is now seeking my 
life; all the more reason for this Benjaminite to do so! Let him curse on, if Yahweh has told him to! 

2Sa 16:12 Perhaps Yahweh will look on my wretchedness and will repay me with good for his curses today”. 
2Sa 16:13 So David and his men went on their way, and Shimei kept pace with him along the opposite 
mountainside, cursing as he went, throwing stones and flinging dust. 

2Sa 16:14 The king and all the people who were with him arrived exhausted at and there they drew 

breath. 

2Sa 16:15 Absalom entered Jerusalem with all the men of Israel; with him was Ahithophel. 

2Sa 16:16 When Hushai the Archite, David’s friend, reached Absalom, Hushai said to Absalom, “Long live the 
king! Long live the king!”. 

2Sa 16:17 Absalom said to Hushai, “Is this your faithful love for your friend? Why didn’t you go away with your 
friend?”. 

2Sa 16:18 Hushai replied to Absalom, “No, the man whom Yahweh and this people and all the men of Israel 
have chosen, he is the man for me, and with him will I stay! 

2Sa 16:19 Besides, whom should I serve, if not his son? As I served your father, so shall I serve you”. 

2Sa 16:20 Absalom said to Ahithophel, “Think carefully. What shall we do?”. 

2Sa 1 6:21 Ahithophel replied to Absalom, “Go to your father’s concubines whom he left to look after the palace; 
then all Israel will hear that you have thoroughly antagonised your father, and the resolution of all your 
supporters will be strengthened”. 

2Sa 1 6:22 So a tent was pitched for Absalom on the flat roof and, with all Israel watching, Absalom went to his 
father’s concubines. 

2Sa 16:23 At the time, whatever advice Ahithophel gave was treated like a decision obtained from God; as by 
David, so by Absalom, was all Ahithophel’s advice regarded. 

2Sa 17:1 Ahithophel said to Absalom, “Let me choose twelve thousand men and set off this very night in pursuit 
of David. 

2Sa 17:2 I shall fall on him while he is tired and dispirited; I shall strike terror into him, and all the people who 
are with him will run away. I shall kill only the king, 

2Sa 17:3 and I shall then bring all the people back to you, like a bride returning to her husband. You seek the 
life of one individual only; the people as a whole will have peace”. 

2Sa 17:4 The suggestion seemed a good one to Absalom and all the elders of Israel. 

2Sa 17:5 Then Absalom said, “Now call Hushai the Archite, for us to hear what he too has to say”. 

2Sa 17:6 When Hushai had come to Absalom, Absalom said, “This is what Ahithophel says. Are we to do as he 
suggests? If not, suggest something yourself”. 

2Sa 17:7 Hushai said to Absalom, “On this occasion the advice given by Ahithophel is not good. 

2Sa 17:8 You know”, Hushai went on, “that your father and his men are great fighters and that they are now as 
angry as a wild bear robbed of her cubs. Your father is a man of war: he will not let the army rest during the 
night. 

2Sa 17:9 At this moment he is concealed in some hollow or other place. If at the outset there are casualties 
among our troops, word will go round that the army supporting Absalom has met with disaster. 

2Sa 17:10 And then even the valiant, the truly lion-hearted, will be demoralised; for all Israel knows that your 
father is a champion and that the men with him are valiant. 

2Sa 17:11 For my part, I offer this advice: Summon all Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, to rally to you, as 
numerous as the sand on the seashore, and you take the field in person with them. 

2Sa 17:12 We shall reach him wherever he is to be found; we shall fall on him as the dew falls on the ground, 
and not leave him or any one of the men with him. 

2Sa 17:13 Should he retire into a town, all Israel will bring ropes to that town, and we shall drag it into the river- 
bed until not a pebble of it is to be found”. 



2Sa 17:14 Then Absalom and all the people of Israel said, “Hushai the Arkite’s advice is better than 
Ahithophel's”, Yahweh having resolved to thwart Ahithophel’s shrewd advice and so bring disaster on Absalom. 
2Sa 17:15 Hushai then told the priests Zadok and Abiathar, “Ahithophel gave such and such advice to Absalom 
and the elders of Israel, but I advised so and so. 

2Sa 17:16 Send with all speed to David and say, ‘Do not camp in the desert passes tonight, but get through 
them as fast as you can, or the king and his whole army may be annihilated’”. 

2Sa 17:17 Jonathan and Ahimaaz were posted at the Fuller’s Spring; a servant-girl was to go and warn them 
and they in turn were to warn King David, since they could not give themselves away by coming into the city 
themselves. 

2Sa 17:18 A young man saw them nonetheless and told Absalom. The pair of them, however, made off quickly, 
reaching the house of a man in Bahurim. In his courtyard was a storage-well and they got down into it. 

2Sa 17:19 The woman took a piece of canvas and, spreading it over the mouth of the storage-well, scattered 
crushed grain on it so that nothing showed. 

2Sa 17:20 When Absalom’s servants reached the woman at the house, they said, “Where are Ahimaaz and 
Jonathan?”. The woman said, “They have gone further on, towards the water”. They searched but, having found 
nothing, went back to Jerusalem. 

2Sa 17:21 When they had gone, the men climbed out of the storage-well and went to warn King David. “Set out!”. 
they told David. “Cross the water quickly, for Ahithophel has given such and such advice against you!”. 

2Sa 17:22 So David and all the troops with him set off and crossed the Jordan. By dawn no one was left, all had 
crossed the Jordan. 

2Sa 17:23 When Ahithophel saw that his advice had not been followed, he saddled his donkey and set off and 
went home to his own town. Then, having set his house in order, he hanged himself. He was buried in his 
father’s tomb. 

2Sa 17:24 David had reached Mahanaim by the time that Absalom crossed the Jordan with all the men of Israel. 
2Sa 17:25 Absalom had put Amasa in command of the army in place of Joab. This Amasa was the son of a 
man called Ithra the Ishmaelite, who had married Abigail, daughter of Jesse and sister of Zeruiah, mother of 
Joab. 

2Sa 17:26 Israel and Absalom pitched their camp in the territory of Gilead. 

2Sa 17:27 When David reached Mahanaim, Shobi son of Nahash from Rabbah-of-the-Ammonites, Machir son 
of Ammiel from Lo-Debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim 

2Sa 17:28 brought bedding, rugs, bowls and crockery; and wheat, barley, meal, roasted grain, beans, lentils, 
2Sa 17:29 honey, curds and cows’ cheese and sheep’s cheese, which they presented to David and the people 
with him for them to eat. “The army”, they said, “must have been hungry, tired and thirsty in the desert”. 

2Sa 18:1 David reviewed the troops who were with him and appointed commanders of thousands and 
commanders of hundreds to lead them. 

2Sa 1 8:2 David divided the army into three groups, one under the command of Joab, another under the 
command of Abishai son of Zeruiah and brother of Joab, and the third under the command of Ittai the Gittite. 
David then said to the troops, “I shall take the field in person with you”. 

2Sa 18:3 But the troops replied, “You are not to take the field. No one will bother about us if we run away, they 
will not even bother about us if half of us are killed, but you are ten thousand times more valuable. So it is better 
if you stay inside the town, in case we need reinforcements”. 

2Sa 18:4 David said, “I will do what you think best”. And the king stood beside the gate as the troops marched 
out by their hundreds and their thousands. 

2Sa 18:5 The king gave orders to Joab, Abishai and Ittai, “For my sake, treat young Absalom gently!”. And the 
troops all heard the king give all the commanders these orders about Absalom. 

2Sa 18:6 So the troops marched out into the open to engage Israel, and the battle took place in the Forest of 
Ephraim. 

2Sa 18:7 There, the army of Israel was beaten by David’s retainers; it was a great defeat that day, with twenty 
thousand casualties. 

2Sa 18:8 The fighting spread throughout the region and that day the forest claimed more victims than the sword. 
2Sa 18:9 Absalom happened to run into some of David’s guards. Absalom was riding his mule and the mule 
passed under the thick branches of a great oak. Absalom’s head got caught in the oak and he was left hanging 
between heaven and earth, while the mule he was riding went on. 

2Sa 18:10 Someöne saw this and reported to Joab, “I have just seen Absalom hanging from an oak”. 

2Sa 18:11 Joab said to the man who had informed him, “If you saw him, why did you not strike him to the 
ground then and there? I would have made it my business to give you ten silver shekels and a belt!”. 

2Sa 18:12 The man replied to Joab, “Even if I could feel the weight of a thousand silver shekels in my hand, I 
would not lift my hand against the king’s son. In our own hearing, the king gave you and Abishai and Ittai these 
orders, ‘For my sake, spare young Absalom’. 



2Sa 18:13 Even if I had deceived myself, nothing stays hidden from the king and you would have dissociated 
yourself from me”. 

2Sa 18:14 Joab then said, “I cannot waste time arguing with you!”. And, taking three darts in his hand, he planted 
them in Absalom’s heart, while he was still alive, deep in the oak-tree. 

2Sa 18:15 Ten soldiers, Joab’s armour-bearers, then came in close, struck Absalom and killed him. 

2Sa 18:16 Joab then had the trumpet sounded, and the troops left off pursuing Israel, since Joab held the 
troops back. 

2Sa 18:17 They took Absalom, flung him into a deep pit in the forest and raised a huge cairn over him. All the 
Israelites had fled, dispersing to their homes. 

2Sa 18:18 Now, during his lifetime, Absalom had made and erected a pillar to himself, which is in the Valley of 
the King. “I have no son”, he said, “to preserve the memory of my name”. He gave his own name to the pillar, and 
today it is still called Absalom’s Monument. 

2Sa 18:19 Ahimaaz son of Zadok said, “Let me run and tell the king the good news that Yahweh has vindicated 
his cause by ridding him of his enemies”. 

2Sa 18:20 But Joab said, “Today you would be no bearer of good news, some other day you may be; but today 
you would not be bringing good news, since the king’s son is dead”. 

2Sa 18:21 Joab then said to the Cushite, “Go and tell the king what you have seen”. The Cushite prostrated 
himself to Joab and ran off. 

2Sa 1 8:22 But Ahimaaz son of Zadok persisted. “Come what may”, he said to Joab, “please let me run after the 
Cushite”. “My son”, Joab said, “why run? You will get no reward for your news”. 

2Sa 1 8:23 But he replied, “Come what may, let me run!”. and Joab said “Run, then!”. So Ahimaaz ran off along the 
road through the Plain, outrunning the Cushite. 

2Sa 18:24 David was sitting between the two gates. The sentry, having gone up to the roof of the gate, looked 
out from the ramparts and saw a man running alone. 

2Sa 18:25 The sentry called down to the king and told him. The king said, “If he is alone, he is bringing good 
news”. 

2Sa 18:26 As the man drew steadily nearer, the lookout man saw another man running, and the sentry above 
the gate shouted, “Here comes another man, running alone!”. David said, “He too is a bearer of good news.’ 

2Sa 1 8:27 The sentry said, “I recognise the way the first man runs; Ahimaaz son of Zadok runs like that”. “He is a 
good man”, said the king, “and comes with good news”. 

2Sa 1 8:28 Ahimaaz went up to the king. “All hail!”. he said, prostrating himself on the ground before the king. 
“Blessed be Yahweh your God”, he said, “who has handed over the men who rebelled against my lord the king!”. 
2Sa 18:29 “Is all well with young Absalom?”. the king asked. Ahimaaz replied, “I saw a great commotion when 
Joab, the king’s servant, sent your servant off, but I do not know what it was”. 

2Sa 18:30 The king said, “Go and stand over there”. He stood to one side and waited. 

2Sa 18:31 Then the Cushite arrived. “Good news for my lord the king!”. the Cushite shouted. “Today Yahweh has 
vindicated your cause, by ridding you of all who had risen up against you”. 

2Sa 18:32 “Is all well with young Absalom?”. the king asked the Cushite. “May the enemies of my lord the king”, 
the Cushite answered, “and all who rise up to harm you, share the fate of that young man!”. 

2Sa 19:1 The king shuddered. He went up to the room over the gate and burst into tears; and, as he wept, he 
kept saying, “Oh, my son Absalom! My son! My son Absalom! If only I had died instead of you! Oh, Absalom my 
son, my son!”. 

2Sa 19:2 Word was brought to Joab, “The king is weeping and mourning for Absalom”. 

2Sa 1 9:3 And for the entire army that day, victory was turned to mourning, the troops having learnt that the king 
was grieving for his son. 

2Sa 19:4 And that day the troops came furtively back into town, like troops creeping shamefacedly away when 
deserting in battle. 

2Sa 19:5 The king had covered his face and kept crying aloud, “My son Absalom! Oh, Absalom my son, my 
son!”. 

2Sa 19:6 Joab went inside to the king and said, “Today you have made all your servants feel ashamed-today, 
when they have saved your life, the lives of your sons and daughters, the lives of your wives and the lives of 
your concubinesl-because you love those who hate you and hate those who love you. 

2Sa 19:7 Today you have made it plain that commanders and soldiers mean nothing to you — for today I can 
see that you would be content if we were all dead, provided that Absalom was alive! 

2Sa 1 9:8 Now get up, come out and reässure your soldiers; for if you do not come out, I swear by Yahweh, not 
one man will stay with you tonight; and this will be a worse misfortune for you than anything that has happened 
to you from your youth until now!”. 

2Sa 1 9:9 The king got up and took his seat at the gate. An announcement was made to the whole army: “The 
king is sitting at the gate”. And the whole army assembled in front of the king. 



2Sa 19:10 Israel had fled, dispersing to their homes. Throughout the tribes of Israel all was dissension and 
people began saying, “The king, having freed us from the clutches of our enemies, having saved us from the 
clutches of the Philistines, has himself had to flee the country to escape from Absalom; 

2Sa 19:11 and now Absalom, whom we had anointed to reign over us, has died in battle. Why does no one 
suggest that the king should be brought back?'What was being said throughout Israel reached the king. 

2Sa 19:12 King David then sent word to the priests Zadok and Abiathar, “Say to the elders of Judah, ‘Why 
should you be the last to bring the king home? 

2Sa 19:13 You are my brothers, you are my own flesh and bone: why should you be the last to bring the king 
back?” 

2Sa 19:14 And say to Amasa, ‘Are you not my own flesh and bone? May God bring unnameable ills on me and 
worse ills, too, if you do not become my permanent army commander instead of Joab!’”. 

2Sa 19:15 Thus he rallied the hearts of the men of Judah to a man and, as a result, they sent word to the king, 
“Come back, you and all who serve you”. 

2Sa 19:16 So the king started home and reached the Jordan. Judah, coming to meet the king to escort him 
across the Jordan, had arrived at Gilgal. 

2Sa 19:17 Shimei son of Gera, the Benjaminite of Bahurim, hurried down with the men of Judah to meet King 
David. 

2Sa 19:18 With him were a thousand men from Benjamin. Ziba, servant of the House of Saul, with his fifteen 
sons and twenty servants, arrived at the Jordan before the king 

2Sa 19:19 and worked manfully ferrying the king’s family across and doing whatever he required. While the king 
was crossing the Jordan, Shimei son of Gera fell at the king’s feet 

2Sa 1 9:20 and said to the king, “I hope my lord does not regard me as guilty of a crime! Forget about the wrong 
your servant did on the day my lord the king left Jerusalem. Let my lord not hold my guilt against me. 

2Sa 1 9:21 For your servant is aware of having sinned, and that is why I have come today — the first member of 
the whole House of Joseph to come down to meet my lord the king”. 

2Sa 1 9:22 At this, Abishai son of Zeruiah spoke up and said, “Does Shimei not deserve death for having cursed 
Yahweh’s anointed?”. 

2Sa 19:23 To which David replied, “What concern is my business to you, sons of Zeruiah, that you should 
oppose my wishes today? Could anyone be put to death in Israel today? Today I know for sure that I am king of 
Israel?”. 

2Sa 19:24 “Your life is spared”, the king said. And the king gave him his oath. 

2Sa 1 9:25 Meribbaal son of Saul also went down to meet the king. He had not cared for his feet or hands, he 
had not trimmed his moustache or washed his clothes from the day of the king’s departure till the day of his 
peaceful return. 

2Sa 19:26 When he arrived from Jerusalem to greet the king, the king asked him, “Why did you not come with 
me, Meribbaal?”. 

2Sa 19:27 “My lord king”, he replied, “my retainer deceived me. Your servant said to him, ‘Saddle the donkey for 
me to ride, so that I can go with the king’, your servant being lame. 

2Sa 19:28 He has slandered your servant to my lord the king. My lord the king, however, is like the Angel of 
God, so do as you think right. 

2Sa 19:29 My father’s entire family deserved no better than death from my lord the king, and yet you admitted 
your servant to the ranks of those who eat at your table. What right have I to make any further appeal to the 
king?”. 

2Sa 19:30 The king said, “You need say no more. I rule that you and Ziba divide the property between you”. 

2Sa 19:31 “Let him take it all”, Meribbaal said to the king, “since my lord the king has come back home in peace!”. 
2Sa 19:32 Barzillai the Gileadite had come down from Rogelim and accompanied the king towards the Jordan, 
intending to take leave of him at the Jordan. 

2Sa 1 9:33 Barzillai was a man of great age; he was eighty years old. He had kept the king in provisions during 
his stay at Mahanaim, being a very wealthy man. 

2Sa 19:34 “Come with me”, the king said to Barzillai, “and I will provide for you at my side in Jerusalem”. 

2Sa 19:35 Barzillai replied to the king, “How many years have I left to live, for me to go up to Jerusalem with the 
king? 

2Sa 19:36 I am now eighty years old; can I tell the good from the bad? Has your servant any taste for his food 
and drink? Can I still hear the voices of men and women singers? Why should your servant be a further burden 
to my lord the king? 

2Sa 19:37 Your servant will go a little way across the Jordan with the king; but why should the king reward me 
so generously for that? 

2Sa 1 9:38 Please allow your servant to go home again, so that I can die in my own town near the grave of my 
father and mother. But here is your servant Chimham; let him go with my lord the king; treat him as you think 



right”. 

2Sa 19:39 The king said, “Let Chimham come along with me then; I shall do whatever you wish for him, and 
anything you request I shall do for your sake”. 

2Sa 19:40 The people then all crossed the Jordan, and the king, having crossed, kissed Barzillai and blessed 
him, and the latter went home. 

2Sa 1 9:41 The king went on to Gilgal and Chimham went with him. All the people of Judah accompanied the 
king, and also half the people of Israel. 

2Sa 19:42 All the men of Israel then came to the king. “Why”, they asked the king, “have our brothers, the men of 
Judah, carried you off and brought the king and his family across the Jordan, and all David’s men with him?”. 

2Sa 19:43 All the men of Judah retorted to the men of Israel, “Because the king is more closely related to us. 
Why do you take offence at this? Have we been eating at the king’s expense? Have we taken any position for 
ourselves?”. 

2Sa 19:44 The men of Israel replied to the men of Judah, “We have ten shares in the king and, what is more, we 
are your elder brothers, so why have you slighted us? Were we not the first to suggest bringing back our king?”. 
The men of Judah’s words were even more intemperate than those of the men of Israel. 

2Sa 20:1 Now there happened to be a scoundrel there called Sheba son of Bichri, a Benjaminite, who sounded 
the trumpet and shouted: We have no share in David, we have no heritage in the son of Jesse. Every man to his 
tents, O Israel! 

2Sa 20:2 At this all the men of Israel deserted David and followed Sheba son of Bichri. But the men of Judah 
stuck close to their king, from the Jordan all the way to Jerusalem. 

2Sa 20:3 David returned to his palace in Jerusalem. The king took the ten concubines, whom he had left to look 
after the palace, and put them under guard. He provided for their upkeep but never went near them again; they 
were shut away until the day they died, widows, as it were, of a living man. 

2Sa 20:4 The king said to Amasa, “Summon me the men of Judah and be here yourself within three days”. 

2Sa 20:5 Amasa went off to summon Judah, but he took longer than the time fixed by David. 

2Sa 20:6 David then said to Abishai, “Sheba son of Bichri is now in a position to do us more damage even than 
Absalom. Take your master’s retainers and be after him, before he can reach any fortified towns and elude us”. 
2Sa 20:7 Joab, the Cherethites, the Pelethites and all the champions took the field under Abishai, setting off 
from Jerusalem in pursuit of Sheba son of Bichri. 

2Sa 20:8 They were near the great stone at Gibeon when Amasa met them, coming the other way. Joab was 
wearing his uniform, over which he had buckled on a sword hanging from his waist in its scabbard; the sword 
came out and fell. 

2Sa 20:9 Joab said to Amasa, “Are you well, brother?”. and, with his right hand, took Amasa by the beard to kiss 
him. 

2Sa 20:10 Amasa paid no attention to the sword, which Joab had now picked up, and Joab struck him with it in 
the belly, spilling his entrails all over the ground. He did not need to strike a second blow; and Amasa died, while 
Joab and Abishai hurried on in pursuit of Sheba son of Bichri. 

2Sa 20:11 One of Joab’s men stood on guard beside Amasa, shouting, “Whoëver is on Joab’s side, whoëver is 
for David, follow Joab!”. 

2Sa 20:12 Amasa meanwhile lay wallowing in his blood in the middle of the road. Seeing that everyone was 
stopping, the man dragged Amasa off the road into the field and threw a cloak over him, having realised that 
everyone passing would stop. 

2Sa 20:13 Once Amasa had been taken off the road, the men all carried on, following Joab in pursuit of Sheba 
son of Bichri. 

2Sa 20:14 Sheba crossed all the tribes of Israel as far as Abel Beth-Maacah, and the Bichrites all … They 
formed up and followed him. 

2Sa 20:15 Laying siege to him in Abel Beth-Maacah, they threw up a ramp against the outer wall of the town, 
2Sa 20:16 while the whole army accompanying Joab undermined the wall to bring it down. A quick-witted 
woman shouted from the town, “Listen! 

2Sa 20:17 Listen! Say to Joab, ‘Come here, I want to speak to you’”. He came forward, and the woman said, 
“Are you Joab?”. “I am”, he replied. She said, “Listen to what your servant says”. “I am listening”, he replied. 

2Sa 20:18 She then spoke as follows, “In olden days people used to say, ‘Abel and Dan are where you should 
enquire 

2Sa 20:19 whether a tradition established by the faithful of Israel has finally died out’. And yet you are trying to 
destroy a town, a metropolis of Israel. Why do you want to devour Yahweh’s heritage?”. 

2Sa 20:20 “The last thing I want to do”, said Joab, “is either to devour or to destroy. 

2Sa 20:21 This is not the issue; a man from the highlands of Ephraim, called Sheba son of Bichri, has revolted 
against the king, against David. Hand that one man over and I will raise the siege of the town”. “Very well”, the 
woman said to Joab, “his head will be thrown over the wall to you”. 



2Sa 20:22 The woman went and spoke to all the people as her wisdom dictated. They cut off the head of Sheba 
son of Bichri and threw it down to Joab. He had the trumpet sounded and they withdrew from the town and all 
went home, while Joab himself went back to the king in Jerusalem. 

2Sa 20:23 Joab commanded the whole army; Benaiah son of Jehoiada commanded the Cherethites and 
Pelethites; 

2Sa 20:24 Adoram was in charge of forced labour; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was herald; 

2Sa 20:25 Shiya was secretary; Zadok and Abiathar were priests; 

2Sa 20:26 also: Ira the Jairite was David’s priest. 

2Sa 21:1 In the days of David there was a famine which lasted for three years on end. David consulted Yahweh, 
and Yahweh said, “Saul and his family have incurred blood-guilt, by putting the Gibeonites to death”. 

2Sa 21 :2 Then the king summoned the Gibeonites and said-now, the Gibeonites were not Israelites, but were a 
remnant of the Amorites, to whom the Israelites had bound themselves by oath; Saul, however, in his zeal for the 
Israelites and for Judah, had done his best to exterminate them — hence David said to the Gibeonites, 

2Sa 21 :3 “What can I do for you? How can I make amends, so that you will call a blessing down on Yahweh’s 
heritage?”. 

2Sa 21 :4 The Gibeonites replied, “Our quarrel with Saul and his family cannot be settled for silver or gold, nor by 
putting to death one man in Israel”. David said, “Say what you want and I will do it for you”. 

2Sa 21 :5 Then they replied to the king, “The man who dismembered us and planned to annihilate us, so that we 
should not exist anywhere in Israelite territory- 

2Sa 21 :6 we want seven of his descendants handed over to us; and we shall dismember them before Yahweh 
at Gibeon on Yahweh’s hill”. “I shall hand them over”, said the king. 

2Sa 21 :7 The king, however, spared Meribbaal son of Jonathan, son of Saul, on account of the oath by Yahweh 
binding them together, binding David and Jonathan son of Saul. 

2Sa 21 :8 The king took the two sons born to Saul by Rizpah daughter of Aiah: Armoni and Meribbaal; and the 
five sons borne by Merab daughter of Saul to Adriel son of Barzillai, of Meholah. 

2Sa 21 :9 He handed these over to the Gibeonites who dismembered them before Yahweh on the hill. The 
seven of them perished together; they were put to death in the first days of the harvest, at the beginning of the 
barley harvest. 

2Sa 21:10 Rizpah daughter of Aiah, wearing sacking and spreading some out for herself on the rock, from the 
beginning of the barley harvest until the rain fell on them from heaven, kept the birds of the sky away from them 
in the daytime, and the wild animals away at night. 

2Sa 21:11 David was told of what Saul’s concubine, Rizpah daughter of Aiah, had done. 

2Sa 21:12 David went and recovered the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan from the notables of Jabesh in 
Gilead. The latter had stolen them from the square in Beth-Shean, where the Philistines had hung them, when 
the Philistines had defeated Saul at Gilboa. 

2Sa 21:13 David fetched the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan. The bones of the men who had been 
dismembered were collected 

2Sa 21:14 and these, with the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan, were buried in the territory of Benjamin, at 
Zela, in the tomb of Saul’s father, Kish. The king’s orders were carried out to the letter and after that, God took 
pity on the country. 

2Sa 21:15 Once again the Philistines made war on Israel. David went down with his retainers; they fought the 
Philistines and David began to tire. 

2Sa 21:16 There was a champion, one of the sons of Rapha. His spear weighed three hundred shekels of 
bronze; he was wearing a new sword and was confident of killing David. 

2Sa 21:17 Abishai son of Zeruiah came to his rescue, however, attacking the Philistine and killing him. Then it 
was that David’s men swore the following oath to him, “You are never to go into battle with us again, in case you 
should extinguish the lamp of Israel!”. 

2Sa 21:18 After this, war with the Philistines broke out again at Gob. This was when Sibbecai of Hushah killed 
Saph, one of the sons of Rapha. 

2Sa 21:19 Again, war with the Philistines broke out at Gob, and Elhanan son of Jair, of Bethlehem, killed Goliath 
of Gath, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam. 

2Sa 21 :20 There was further warfare at Gath, where there was a man of huge stature with six fingers on each 
hand and six toes on each foot, twenty-four in all. He too was a son of Rapha. 

2Sa 21 :21 When he defied Israel, Jonathan son of Shimea, brother of David cut him down. 

2Sa 21 :22 These four were sons of Rapha in Gath and fell at the hands of David and his retainers. 

2Sa 22:1 David addressed the words of this song to Yahweh, when Yahweh had delivered him from the 
clutches of all his enemies and from the clutches of Saul. 

2Sa 22:2 He said: Yahweh is my rock and my fortress, 

2Sa 22:3 my deliverer is my God. I take refuge in him, my rock, my shield, my saving strength, my stronghold, 



my place of refuge. My Saviour, you have saved me from violence; 

2Sa 22:4 I call to Yahweh, who is worthy of praise, and I am saved from my foes. 

2Sa 22:5 With Death’s breakers closing in on me, Belial’s torrents ready to swallow me, 

2Sa 22:6 Sheol’s snares on every side of me, Death’s traps lying ahead of me, 

2Sa 22:7 I called to Yahweh in my anguish, I cried for help to my God, from his Temple he heard my voice, my 
cry came to his ears! 

2Sa 22:8 Then the earth quaked and rocked, the heavens’ foundations shuddered, they quaked at his blazing 
anger. 

2Sa 22:9 Smoke rose from his nostrils, from his mouth devouring fire (coals were kindled at it). 

2Sa 22:10 He parted the heavens and came down, a storm-cloud underneath his feet; 

2Sa 22:11 riding one of the winged creatures, he flew, soaring on the wings of the wind. 

2Sa 22:12 He wrapped himself in darkness, his pavilion dark waters and dense cloud. 

2Sa 22:13 A brightness lit up before him, hail and blazing fire. 

2Sa 22:14 Yahweh thundered from the heavens, the Most High made his voice heard. 

2Sa 22:15 He shot his arrows and scattered them, his lightning flashed and routed them. 

2Sa 22:16 The very springs of ocean were exposed, the world’s foundations were laid bare, at the roaring of 
Yahweh, at the blast of breath from his nostrils! 

2Sa 22:17 He reached down from on high, snatched me up, pulled me from the watery depths, 

2Sa 22:18 rescued me from my mighty foe, from my enemies who were stronger than I. 

2Sa 22:19 They assailed me on my day of disaster, but Yahweh was there to support me, 

2Sa 22:20 he freed me, set me at large, he rescued me, because he loves me. 

2Sa 22:21 Yahweh rewards me for my uprightness, as my hands are pure so he repays me, 

2Sa 22:22 since I have kept the ways of Yahweh, and not fallen away from my God. 

2Sa 22:23 His judgements are all before me, his statutes I have not put away from me; 

2Sa 22:24 I am blameless before him, I keep myself clear of evil. 

2Sa 22:25 Hence Yahweh repaid me for acting uprightly because he could see I was pure. 

2Sa 22:26 Faithful you are to the faithful, blameless with the blameless, 

2Sa 22:27 sincere to the sincere but cunning to the crafty, 

2Sa 22:28 you save a people that is humble and humiliate those with haughty looks. 

2Sa 22:29 Yahweh, you yourself are my lamp, my God lights up my darkness; 

2Sa 22:30 with you I storm the rampart with my God I can scale any wall. 

2Sa 22:31 This God, his way is blameless; the word of Yahweh is refined in the furnace, for he alone is the 
shield of all who take refuge in him. 

2Sa 22:32 For who is God but Yahweh, who is a rock but our God: 

2Sa 22:33 this God who girds me with strength, who makes my way free from blame, 

2Sa 22:34 who makes me as swift as a deer and sets me firmly on the heights, 

2Sa 22:35 who trains my hands for battle my arms to bend a bow of bronze. 

2Sa 22:36 You give me your invincible shield, you never cease to listen to me, 

2Sa 22:37 you give me the strides of a giant, give me ankles that never weaken- 

2Sa 22:38 I pursue my enemies and exterminate them, not turning back till they are annihilated; 

2Sa 22:39 I strike them down, and they cannot rise, they fall, they are under my feet. 

2Sa 22:40 You have girded me with strength for the fight, bent down my assailants beneath me, 

2Sa 22:41 made my enemies retreat before me; and those who hate me I destroy. 

2Sa 22:42 They cry out, there is no one to save, to Yahweh, but no answer comes. 

2Sa 22:43 I crumble them like the dust of the squares, trample them like the mud of the streets. 

2Sa 22:44 You free me from the quarrels of my people, you place me at the head of the nations, a people I did 
not know are now my servants, 

2Sa 22:45 foreigners come wooing my favour, no sooner do they hear than they obey me, 

2Sa 22:46 foreigners grow faint of heart, they come trembling out of their fastnesses. 

2Sa 22:47 Life to Yahweh! Blessed be my rock! Exalted be the God of my salvation, 

2Sa 22:48 the God who gives me vengeance and crushes the peoples under me, 

2Sa 22:49 who takes me away from my enemies. You lift me high above those who attack me, you deliver me 
from the man of violence. 

2Sa 22:50 For this I will praise you, Yahweh, among the nations, and sing praise to your name. 

2Sa 22:51 He saves his king, time after time, displays faithful love for his anointed, for David and his heirs for 
ever. 

2Sa 23:1 These are the last words of David: Thus speaks David son of Jesse, thus speaks the man raised to 
eminence, the anointed of the God of Jacob, the singer of the songs of Israel: 

2Sa 23:2 The spirit of Yahweh speaks through me, his word is on my tongue; 



2Sa 23:3 the God of Jacob has spoken, the Rock of Israel has said to me: He whose rule is upright on earth, 
who rules in the fear of God, 

2Sa 23:4 is like the morning light at sunrise (on a cloudless morning) making the grass of the earth sparkle after 
rain. 

2Sa 23:5 Yes, my House stands firm with God: he has made an eternal covenant with me, all in order, well 
assured; does he not bring to fruition my every victory and desire? 

2Sa 23:6 But men of Belial he rejects like thorns, for these are never taken up in the hand: 

2Sa 23:7 no one touches them except with a pitchfork or spear-shaft, and then only to burn them to nothing! 

2Sa 23:8 These are the names of David’s champions: Ishbaal the Hachmonite leader of the Three; it was he 
who brandished his spear over eight hundred men whom he had killed at one time. 

2Sa 23:9 Next, there was Eleazar son of Dodo, the Ahohite, one of the three champions. He was with David at 
Pas-Dammim when the Philistines mustered for battle there and the men of Israel had disbanded. 

2Sa 23:10 But he stood his ground and cut down the Philistines until his hand was so stiff that he could not let 
go of the sword. Yahweh brought about a great victory that day, and the people rallied behind him, although only 
to plunder. 

2Sa 23:11 Next, there was Shamma son of Elah, the Hararite. The Philistines had mustered at Lehi. There was 
a field full of lentils there; the people fled from the Philistines, 

2Sa 23:12 but he took his stand in the middle of the field, held it, and cut down the Philistines; and Yahweh 
brought about a great victory. 

2Sa 23:13 Three members of the Thirty went down at the beginning of the harvest and came to David at the 
Cave of Adullam while a company of Philistines was encamped in the Valley of the Rephaim. 

2Sa 23:14 David was then in the stronghold, and there was a Philistine garrison in Bethlehem. 

2Sa 23:15 Longingly David said, “If only someöne would fetch me a drink of water from the well that stands by 
the gate at Bethlehem!”. 

2Sa 23: 1 6 At this, the three champions, forcing their way through the Philistine camp, drew water from the well 
that stands by the gate of Bethlehem and, taking it away, presented it to David. He, however, would not drink 
any of it, but poured it out as a libation to Yahweh. 

2Sa 23:17 “Yahweh preserve me”, he said, “from doing such a thing! This is the blood of men who went at risk of 
their lives”. That was why he would not drink. Such were the deeds of these three champions. 

2Sa 23:18 Abishai, brother of Joab and son of Zeruiah, was leader of the Thirty. It was he who brandished his 
spear over three hundred men whom he had killed, winning himself a name among the Thirty. 

2Sa 23:19 He was a most illustrious member of the Thirty and became their captain, but he was not equal to the 
Three. 

2Sa 23:20 Benaiah of Kabzeel was the son of Jehoiada and hero of many exploits. He it was who slaughtered 
two formidable Moabites and, one snowy day, climbed down and slaughtered the lion in the storage-well. 

2Sa 23:21 He also slaughtered an Egyptian of great stature. The Egyptian was armed with a spear, but he took 
him on with a staff, tore the spear from the Egyptian’s hand and killed the man with it. 

2Sa 23:22 Such were the exploits of Benaiah son of Jehoiada, winning him a name among the thirty champions. 
2Sa 23:23 He was a most illustrious member of the Thirty, but he was not equal to the Three. David put him in 
command of his bodyguard. 

2Sa 23:24 Asahel brother of Joab was one of the Thirty; Elhanan son of Dodo, of Bethlehem; 

2Sa 23:25 Shammah of Harod; Elika of Harod; 

2Sa 23:26 Helez of Beth-Pelet; Ira son of Ikkesh, of Tekoa; 

2Sa 23:27 Abiezer of Anathoth; Sibbecai of Hushah; 

2Sa 23:28 Zalmon of Ahoh; Maharai of Netophah; 

2Sa 23:29 Heled son of Baanah, of Netophah; Ittai son of Ribai, of Gibeah in Benjamin; 

2Sa 23:30 Benaiah of Pirathon; Hiddai of the Torrents of Gaash; 

2Sa 23:31 Abibaal of Beth-ha-Arabah; Azmaveth of Bahurim; 

2Sa 23:32 Eliahba of Shaalbon; Jashen of Gimzo; Jonathan 

2Sa 23:33 son of Shammah, of Harar; Ahiam son of Sharar, of Harar; 

2Sa 23:34 Eliphelet son of Ahasbai, of Beth-Maacah; Eliam son of Ahithophel, of Gilo; 

2Sa 23:35 Hezro of Carmel; Paarai of Arab; 

2Sa 23:36 Igal son of Nathan, of Zobah; Bani the Gadite; 

2Sa 23:37 Zelek the Ammonite; Naharai of Beeroth squire to Joab, son of Zeruiah; 

2Sa 23:38 Ira of Jattir; Gareb of Jattir; 

2Sa 23:39 Uriah the Hittite- thirty-seven in all. 

2Sa 24:1 Again, Yahweh’s anger was aroused against Israel, and he incited David against them. “Go”, he said, 
“take a census of Israel and Judah”. 

2Sa 24:2 The king said to Joab and the senior army officers who were with him, “Now, go through all the tribes 



of Israel from Dan to Beersheba, and take a census of the people; I wish to know the size of the population”. 

2Sa 24:3 Joab said to the king, “May Yahweh your God multiply the people a hundred times — however many 
there are — while my lord the king still has eyes to see it, but why should my lord the king be set on this?”. 

2Sa 24:4 The king nonetheless enforced his order on Joab and the senior officers, and Joab and the senior 
officers left the king’s presence, to take a census of the people of Israel. 

2Sa 24:5 They crossed the Jordan and made a start with Aroer and the town in the middle of the valley, then 
moved on to the Gadites and to Jazer. 

2Sa 24:6 They then went to Gilead and the territory of the Hittites, to Kadesh; they then went to Dan and from 
Dan cut across to Sidon. 

2Sa 24:7 They then went to the fortress of Tyre and to all the towns of the Hittites and Canaanites ending up in 
the Negeb of Judah at Beersheba. 

2Sa 24:8 Having travelled throughout the country, after nine months and twenty days they returned to 
Jerusalem. 

2Sa 24:9 Joab gave the king the census results for the people; Israel had eight hundred thousand fighting men 
who could wield a sword, and Judah five hundred thousand. 

2Sa 24: 1 0 But afterwards David’s heart misgave him for having taken a census of the people. David then said to 
Yahweh, “I have committed a grave sin by doing this. But now, Yahweh, I beg you to forgive your servant for this 
fault, for I have acted very foolishly”. 

2Sa 24:11 When, however, David got up next morning, the following message had come from Yahweh to the 
prophet Gad, David’s seer, 

2Sa 24:12 “Go and say to David, ‘Yahweh says this: I offer you three things; choose which one of them I am to 
inflict on you’”. 

2Sa 24:13 So Gad went to David and said, “Which do you prefer: to have three years of famine befall your 
country; to flee for three months before a pursuing army; or to have three days of epidemic in your country? Now 
think, and decide how I am to answer him who sends me”. 

2Sa 24:14 David said to Gad, “I am very apprehensive … Better to fall into Yahweh’s hands, since his mercies 
are great, than to fall into the hands of men!”. 

2Sa 24: 1 5 So David chose the epidemic. It was the time of the wheat harvest. So Yahweh unleashed an 
epidemic on Israel from that morning until the time determined; plague ravaged the people and, of the people 
from Dan to Beersheba, seventy thousand died. 

2Sa 24:16 But when the angel stretched his hand towards Jerusalem to destroy it, Yahweh felt sorry about the 
calamity and said to the angel who was destroying the people, “Enough now! Hold your hand!”. The angel of 
Yahweh was standing by the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite. 

2Sa 24:17 When David saw the angel who was ravaging the people, he said to Yahweh, “I was the one who 
sinned. I was the one who acted wrongly. But these, the flock, what have they done? Let your hand lie heavy on 
me and on my family!”. 

2Sa 24:18 Gad went to David that day and said, “Go up and raise an altar to Yahweh on the threshing-floor of 
Araunah the Jebusite”. 

2Sa 24:19 So, at Gad’s bidding, David went up, as Yahweh had ordered. 

2Sa 24:20 When Araunah looked up and saw the king and his retinue advancing towards him-Araunah was 
threshing the wheat — Araunah came forward and prostrated himself on the ground at the king’s feet. 

2Sa 24:21 “Why has my lord the king come to his servant?”. Araunah asked. David replied, “To buy the threshing- 
floor from you, to build an altar to Yahweh, so that the plague may be lifted from the people”. 

2Sa 24:22 Araunah said to David, “Let my lord the king take it and make what offerings he thinks fit. Here are 
the oxen for the burnt offering, the threshing-sleds and the oxen’s yokes for the wood. 

2Sa 24:23 My lord the king’s servant will give the king everything. And”, Araunah said to the king, “may Yahweh 
your God accept what you offer!”. 

2Sa 24:24 “No”, said the king to Araunah, “I shall give you a price for it; I will not offer Yahweh my God burnt 
offerings which have cost me nothing”. David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver. 
2Sa 24:25 David built an altar to Yahweh and offered burnt offerings and communion sacrifices. Yahweh then 
took pity on the country and the plague was lifted from Israel. 

1 Ki 1:1 King David was now a very old man, and though wrapped in bedclothes he could not keep warm. 

1 Ki 1:2 So his servants said to him, “Let us find a young girl for my lord the king, to wait on the king and look 
after him; she will lie close beside you and this will keep my lord the king warm”. 

1 Ki 1:3 Having searched for a beautiful girl throughout the territory of Israel, they found Abishag of Shunem and 
brought her to the king. 

1 Ki 1:4 The girl was very beautiful. She looked after the king and waited on him but the king did not have 
intercourse with her. 

1 Ki 1:5 Now Adonijah son of Haggith was growing pretentious and saying, “I shall be king!”. Accordingly, he 



procured a chariot and team with fifty guards to run ahead of him. 

1 Ki 1:6 Never once in his life had his father crossed him by saying, “Why are you behaving like that?”. He was 
very handsome too; his mother had given birth to him after Absalom. 

1 Ki 1:7 He conferred with Joab son of Zeruiah and with the priest Abiathar, who both rallied to Adonijah’s cause; 
1 Ki 1:8 but neither Zadok the priest, nor Benaiah son of Jehoiada, nor the prophet Nathan, nor Shimei and Rei, 
nor David’s champions, supported Adonijah. 

1 Ki 1:9 One day when Adonijah was sacrificing sheep, oxen and fattened calves at the Sliding Stone which is 
beside the Fuller’s Spring, he invited all his brothers, the royal princes, and all the men of Judah in the king’s 
service; 

1 Ki 1:10 but he did not invite the prophet Nathan, or Benaiah, or the champions, or his brother Solomon. 

1 Ki 1:11 Nathan then said to Bathsheba, Solomon’s mother, “Have you not heard that, unknown to our lord 
David, Adonijah son of Haggith has become king? 

1 Ki 1:12 Well, this is my advice to you if you want to save your own life and the life of your son Solomon. 

1 Ki 1:13 Go straight in to King David and say, ‘My lord king, did you not make your servant this promise on 
oath: Your son Solomon is to be king after me; he is the one who is to sit on my throne? How is it, then, that 
Adonijah is king?’. 

1 Ki 1:14 And while you are still there talking to the king, I shall come in after you and confirm what you say”. 

1 Ki 1:15 So Bathsheba went to the king in his room (he was very old and Abishag of Shunem was in attendance 
on him). 

1 Ki 1:16 She knelt, prostrated herself before the king, and the king said, “What do you want?”. 

1 Ki 1:17 “My lord”, she replied, “you swore to your servant by Yahweh your God, ‘Your son Solomon is to be 
king after me; he is the one who is to sit on my throne’. 

1 Ki 1:18 And now here is Adonijah king, and you, my lord king, knowing nothing about it! 

1 Ki 1:19 He has sacrificed quantities of oxen, fattened calves and sheep, and invited all the royal princes, the 
priest Abiathar, and Joab the army commander; but he has not invited your servant Solomon. 

1 Ki 1:20 Yet you are the man, my lord king, to whom all Israel looks, to tell them who is to succeed my lord the 
king. 

1 Ki 1 :21 And when my lord the king falls asleep with his ancestors, Solomon and I shall be made to suffer for 
this”. 

1 Ki 1 :22 She was still speaking to the king when the prophet Nathan came in. 

1 Ki 1:23 The king was told, “The prophet Nathan is here”; and he came into the king’s presence and prostrated 
himself on his face before the king. 

1 Ki 1:24 “My lord king”, said Nathan, “is this, then, your decree, ‘Adonijah is to be king after me; he is the one 
who is to sit on my throne?’ 

1 Ki 1 :25 For he has gone down today and sacrificed quantities of oxen, fattened calves and sheep, and invited 
all the royal princes, the army commanders, and the priest Abiathar; and they are there now, eating and drinking 
in his presence and shouting, ‘Long live King Adonijah!’. 

1 Ki 1:26 He has not, however, invited me your servant, Zadok the priest, Benaiah son of Jehoiada, or your 
servant Solomon. 

1 Ki 1 :27 Can it be that this is done with my lord the king’s approval and that you have not told those loyal to you 
who is to succeed to the throne of my lord the king?”. 

1 Ki 1:28 King David then spoke. “Call Bathsheba to me”, he said. And she came into the king’s presence and 
stood before him. 

1 Ki 1:29 Then the king swore this oath, “As Yahweh lives, who has delivered me from all adversity, 

1 Ki 1:30 just as I swore to you by Yahweh, God of Israel, that your son Solomon should be king after me and 
take my place on my throne, so I shall bring it about this very day”. 

1 Ki 1 :31 Bathsheba knelt down, prostrated herself on her face before the king and said, “May my lord King 
David live for ever!”. 

1 Ki 1:32 Then King David said, “Summon Zadok the priest, the prophet Nathan and Benaiah son of Jehoiada”. 
So they came into the king’s presence. 

1 Ki 1:33 “Take the royal guard with you”, said the king, “mount my son Solomon on my own mule and escort him 
down to Gihon. 

1 Ki 1:34 There Zadok the priest and the prophet Nathan are to anoint him king of Israel; then sound the trumpet 
and shout, ‘Long live King Solomon!’. 

1 Ki 1 :35 Then you are to escort him back, and he is then to assume my throne and be king in place of me, for 
he is the man whom I have appointed as ruler of Israel and of Judah”. 

1 Ki 1 :36 Benaiah son of Jehoiada answered the king. “Amen!”. he said. “And may Yahweh, God of my lord the 
king, confirm it! 

1 Ki 1:37 As Yahweh has been with my lord the king, so may he be with Solomon and make his throne even 



greater than the throne of my lord King David!”. 

1 Ki 1:38 Zadokthe priest, the prophet Nathan, Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and Pelethites 
then went down; they mounted Solomon on King David’s mule and escorted him to Gihon. 

1 Ki 1 :39 Zadok the priest took the horn of oil from the Tent and anointed Solomon. They sounded the trumpet 
and all the people shouted, “Long live King Solomon!”. 

1 Ki 1 :40 The people all escorted him back, with pipes playing and loud rejoicing and shouts to split the earth. 

1 Ki 1 :41 Adonijah and his guests, who had by then finished their meal, all heard the noise. Joab too heard the 
sound of the trumpet and said, “What is that noise of uproar in the city?”. 

1 Ki 1 :42 While he was still speaking, Jonathan son of Abiathar the priest arrived. “Come in”, Adonijah said, “you 
are an honest man, so you must be bringing good news”. 

1 Ki 1:43 “The truth is”, Jonathan answered, “our lord King David has made Solomon king. 

1 Ki 1 :44 With him, the king sent Zadok the priest, the prophet Nathan, Benaiah son of Jehoiada and the 
Cherethites and Pelethites; they mounted him on the king’s mule, 

1 Ki 1 :45 and Zadok the priest and the prophet Nathan have anointed him king at Gihon; and they have gone 
back again with shouts of joy and the city is now in an uproar; that was the noise you heard. 

1 Ki 1:46 What is more, Solomon is seated on the royal throne. 

1 Ki 1:47 And further, the king’s officers have been to congratulate our lord King David with the words, ‘May your 
God make the name of Solomon more glorious than yours, and his throne more exalted than your own!’. And the 
king bowed down on his bed, 

1 Ki 1 :48 and then said, ‘Blessed be Yahweh, God of Israel, for setting one of my own sons on the throne while I 
am still alive to see it!’”. 

1 Ki 1:49 At this, all Adonijah’s guests, taking fright, got up and made off in their several directions. 

1 Ki 1 :50 Adonijah, in terror of Solomon, got up and ran off to cling to the horns of the altar. 

1 Ki 1 :51 Solomon was told, “You should know that Adonijah is terrified of King Solomon and is now clinging to 
the horns of the altar, saying, ‘Let King Solomon first swear to me that he will not have his servant executed’”. 

1 Ki 1 :52 “Should he bear himself honourably”, Solomon answered, “not one hair of his shall fall to the ground; 
but if he proves difficult, he shall die”. 

1 Ki 1:53 King Solomon then sent for him to be brought down from the altar; he came and threw himself 
prostrate before King Solomon; Solomon said to him, “Go to your house”. 

1 Ki 2:1 As David’s life drew to its close he laid this charge on his son Solomon, 

1 Ki 2:2 “I am going the way of all the earth. Be strong and show yourself a man. 

1 Ki 2:3 Observe the injunctions of Yahweh your God, following his ways and keeping his laws, his 
commandments, his ordinances and his decrees, as stands written in the Law of Moses, so that you may be 
successful in everything you do and undertake, 

1 Ki 2:4 and that Yahweh may fulfil the promise which he made me, ‘If your sons are careful how they behave, 
and walk loyally before me with all their heart and soul, you will never want for a man on the throne of Israel’. 

1 Ki 2:5 “You know too what Joab son of Zeruiah did to me, and what he did to the two commanders of the army 
of Israel, Abner son of Ner and Amasa son of Jether; how he murdered them, shedding the blood of war in time 
of peace and staining the belt round my waist and the sandals on my feet with the blood of war. 

1 Ki 2:6 You will be wise not to let his grey head go down to Sheol in peace. 

1 Ki 2:7 As regards the sons of Barzillai of Gilead, treat them with faithful love, let them be among those who eat 
at your table, for they were as kind to me when I was fleeing from your brother Absalom. 

1 Ki 2:8 You also have with you Shimei son of Gera, the Benjaminite from Bahurim. He called down a terrible 
curse on me the day I left for Mahanaim, but he came down to meet me at the Jordan and I swore to him by 
Yahweh that I would not put him to death. 

1 Ki 2:9 But you, you must not let him go unpunished; you are a wise man and will know how to deal with him, to 
bring his grey head down to Sheol in blood”. 

1 Ki 2:10 So David fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the City of David. 

1 Ki 2:1 1 David was king of Israel for a period of forty years: he reigned at Hebron for seven years, and in 
Jerusalem for thirty-three. 

1 Ki 2:12 Solomon then sat on the throne of David, and his sovereignty was securely established. 

1 Ki 2:13 Adonijah son of Haggith went to Bathsheba mother of Solomon. “Do you bring peace?”. she asked. He 
replied, “Yes, peace”. 

1 Ki 2:14 Then he said, “I have something to say to you”. “Say on”, she replied. 

1 Ki 2:15 “You know”, he said, “that the kingdom should have come to me, and that all Israel expected me to be 

king; but the crown eluded me and fell to my brother, since it came to him from Yahweh. 

1 Ki 2:16 Now I have one request to make you; do not refuse me”. “Go on”, she said. 

1 Ki 2:17 He went on, “Please ask King Solomon — for he will not refuse you — to give me Abishag of Shunem in 

marriage”. 



1 Ki 2:18 “Very well”, Bathsheba replied, “I shall speak to the king about you”. 

1 Ki 2:19 So Bathsheba went to King Solomon to speak to him about Adonijah; the king got up to meet her and 
bowed before her; he then sat down on his throne; a seat was brought for the king’s mother, and she sat down 
on his right. 

1 Ki 2:20 She said, “I have one small request to make you; do not refuse me”. “Mother”, the king replied, “make 
your request, for I shall not refuse you”. 

1 Ki 2:21 “Let Abishag of Shunem”, she said, “be given in marriage to your brother Adonijah”. 

1 Ki 2:22 King Solomon replied to his mother, “And why do you request Abishag of Shunem for Adonijah? You 
might as well request the kingdom for him, since he is my elder brother and Abiathar the priest and Joab son of 
Zeruiah are on his side”. 

1 Ki 2:23 And King Solomon swore by Yahweh: “May God bring unnameable ills on me, and worse ills, too”, he 
said, “if Adonijah does not pay for these words of his with his life! 

1 Ki 2:24 As Yahweh lives who has set me securely on the throne of my father David, and who, as he promised, 
has given him a dynasty, Adonijah shall be put to death this very day”. 

1 Ki 2:25 And King Solomon commissioned Benaiah son of Jehoiada to strike him down, and that was how he 
died. 

1 Ki 2:26 As for Abiathar the priest, the king said to him, “Go to Anathoth to your estate. You deserve to die, but I 
am not going to put you to death now, since you carried the ark of Yahweh in the presence of my father David 
and shared all my father’s hardships”. 

1 Ki 2:27 Solomon deprived Abiathar of the priesthood of Yahweh, thus fulfilling the prophecy which Yahweh had 
uttered against the House of Eli at Shiloh. 

1 Ki 2:28 When the news reached Joab — for Joab had lent his support to Adonijah, though he had not 
supported Absalom — he fled to the Tent of Yahweh and clung to the horns of the altar. 

1 Ki 2:29 King Solomon was told, “Joab has fled to the Tent of Yahweh; he is there beside the altar”. On this, 
Solomon sent word to Joab, “What reason did you have for fleeing to the altar?”. Joab replied, “I was afraid of you 
and fled to Yahweh”. Solomon then sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada. “Go”, he said, “and strike him down”. 

1 Ki 2:30 Accordingly Benaiah went to the Tent of Yahweh. “By order of the king”, he said, “come out!”. “No”, he 
said, “I will die here”. So Benaiah brought word back to the king, “This is what Joab said, and the answer he gave 
me”. 

1 Ki 2:31 “Do as he says”, the king replied. “Strike him down and bury him, and so rid me and my family today of 
the innocent blood which Joab has shed. 

1 Ki 2:32 Yahweh will bring his blood down on his own head, because he struck down two more upright and 
better men than he, and, without my father David’s knowledge, put to the sword Abner son of Ner, commander of 
the army of Israel, and Amasa son of Jether, commander of the army of Judah. 

1 Ki 2:33 May their blood come down on the head of Joab and his descendants for ever, but may David, his 
descendants, his dynasty, his throne, have peace for ever from Yahweh”. 

1 Ki 2:34 Whereupon Benaiah son of Jehoiada went out, struck Joab down and put him to death; he was buried 
at his home in the desert. 

1 Ki 2:35 In his place as head of the army the king appointed Benaiah son of Jehoiada and, in place of Abiathar, 
the priest Zadok. 

1 Ki 2:36 The king had Shimei summoned to him. “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem”, he told him. “You are to 
live there; do not leave it to go anywhere at all. 

1 Ki 2:37 The day you go out and cross the ravine of the Kidron, be sure you will certainly die. Your blood will be 
on your own head”. 

1 Ki 2:38 “That is a fair demand”, Shimei replied to the king, “your servant will do as my lord the king orders”. And 
for a long time Shimei lived in Jerusalem. 

1 Ki 2:39 But when three years had gone by, it happened that two of Shimei’s slaves ran away to Achish son of 
Maacah, king of Gath; Shimei was told, “Your slaves are in Gath”. 

1 Ki 2:40 On this, Shimei got up and saddled his donkey and went to Akish at Gath to find his slaves. He went off 
and brought his slaves back from Gath. 

1 Ki 2:41 Solomon was informed that Shimei had left Jerusalem for Gath and come back again. 

1 Ki 2:42 The king had Shimei summoned to him. “Did I not make you swear by Yahweh”, he said, “and did I not 
warn you, ‘The day you leave to go anywhere at all, be sure you will certainly die?’ To which you replied, ‘That 
is a fair demand’. 

1 Ki 2:43 Why did you not keep the oath to Yahweh and the order which I imposed on you?”. 

1 Ki 2:44 The king then said to Shimei, “You know well all the evil you did to my father David. Yahweh is about to 
bring your wickedness down on your own head. 

1 Ki 2:45 But may King Solomon be blessed, and may the throne of David be kept secure before Yahweh for 
ever!”. 



1 Ki 2:46 The king gave orders to Benaiah son of Jehoiada; he went out and struck Shimei down; and that was 
how he died. And now the kingdom was securely in Solomon’s hands. 

1 Ki 3:1 Solomon became the son-in-law of Pharaoh king of Egypt; he married Pharaoh’s daughter, and took her 
to the City of David until he could complete the building of his palace, the Temple of Yahweh and the ramparts of 
Jerusalem. 

1 Ki 3:2 The people, however, were still sacrificing on the high places, because at that time a dwelling-place for 
the name of Yahweh had not yet been built. 

1 Ki 3:3 Solomon loved Yahweh: he followed the precepts of his father David, except that he offered sacrifice 
and incense on the high places. 

1 Ki 3:4 The king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, since that was the principal high place — Solomon presented 
a thousand burnt offerings on that altar. 

1 Ki 3:5 At Gibeon Yahweh appeared to Solomon in a dream during the night. God said, “Ask what you would 
like me to give you”. 

1 Ki 3:6 Solomon replied, “You showed most faithful love to your servant David, my father, when he lived his life 
before you in faithfulness and uprightness and integrity of heart; you have continued this most faithful love to him 
by allowing a son of his to sit on his throne today. 

1 Ki 3:7 Now, Yahweh my God, you have made your servant king in succession to David my father. But I am a 
very young man, unskilled in leadership. 

1 Ki 3:8 And here is your servant, surrounded with your people whom you have chosen, a people so numerous 
that its number cannot be counted or reckoned. 

1 Ki 3:9 So give your servant a heart to understand how to govern your people, how to discern between good 
and evil, for how could one otherwise govern such a great people as yours?”. 

1 Ki 3:10 It pleased Yahweh that Solomon should have asked for this. 

1 Ki 3:1 1 “Since you have asked for this”, God said, “and not asked for long life for yourself or riches or the lives 
of your enemies but have asked for a discerning judgement for yourself, 

1 Ki 3:12 here and now I do what you ask. I give you a heart wise and shrewd as no one has had before and no 
one will have after you. 

1 Ki 3:13 What you have not asked I shall give you too: such riches and glory as no other king can match. 

1 Ki 3:14 And I shall give you a long life, if you follow my ways, keeping my laws and commandments, as your 
father David followed them”. 

1 Ki 3:15 Then Solomon woke up; it had been a dream. He returned to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of 
the covenant of Yahweh; he presented burnt offerings and communion sacrifices and held a banquet for all 
those in his service. 

1 Ki 3:16 Later two prostitutes came to the king and stood before him. 

1 Ki 3:17 “If it please you, my lord”, one of the women said, “this woman and I live in the same house, and while 
she was in the house I gave birth to a child. 

1 Ki 3:18 Now it happened on the third day after my delivery that this woman also gave birth to a child. We were 
alone together; there was no one else in the house with us; just the two of us in the house. 

1 Ki 3:19 Now one night this woman’s son died; she overlaid him. 

1 Ki 3:20 And in the middle of the night she got up and took my son from beside me while your servant was 
asleep; she took him in her arms and put her own dead son in mine. 

1 Ki 3:21 When I got up to suckle my child, there he was, dead. But in the morning I looked at him carefully, and 
he was not the child I had borne at all”. 

1 Ki 3:22 Then the other woman spoke. “That is not true! My son is the live one, yours is the dead one”; and the 
first retorted, “That is not true! Your son is the dead one, mine is the live one”. And so they wrangled before the 
king. 

1 Ki 3:23 “This one says”, the king observed, “‘My son is the one who is alive; your son is dead’, while the other 
says, ‘That is not true! Your son is the dead one, mine is the live one’. 

1 Ki 3:24 Bring me a sword”, said the king; and a sword was brought into the king’s presence. 

1 Ki 3:25 “Cut the living child in two”, the king said, “and give half to one, half to the other”. 

1 Ki 3:26 At this the woman who was the mother of the living child addressed the king, for she felt acutely for her 
son. “I beg you, my lord”, she said, “let them give her the live child; on no account let them kill him!”. But the other 
said, “He shall belong to neither of us. Cut him in half!”. 

1 Ki 3:27 Then the king gave his decision. “Give the live child to the first woman”, he said, “and do not kill him. 

She is his mother”. 

1 Ki 3:28 All Israel came to hear of the judgement which the king had pronounced and held the king in awe, 
recognising that he possessed divine wisdom for dispensing justice. 

1 Ki 4:1 King Solomon was king of all Israel, 

1 Ki 4:2 and these were his high officials: Azariah son of Zadok, priest; 



1 Ki 4:3 Elihaph and Ahijah sons of Shisha, secretaries; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud, herald. 

1 Ki 4:4 (Benaiah son of Jehoiada, commander of the army. Zadok and Abiathar, priests); 

1 Ki 4:5 Azariah son of Nathan, chief administrator; Zabud son of Nathan, Friend of the King; 

1 Ki 4:6 Ahishar, master of the palace; Eliab son of Joab, commander of the army; Adoram son of Abda, in 
charge of forced labour. 

1 Ki 4:7 Solomon had twelve administrators for all Israel who saw to the provisioning of the king and his 
household; each had to provide for one month in the year. 

1 Ki 4:8 These are their names: Son of Hur, in the mountain country of Ephraim. 

1 Ki 4:9 Son of Deker, in Makaz, Shaalbim, Beth-Shemesh, Aijalon, Beth-Hanan. 

1 Ki 4:10 Son of Hesed, in Arubboth; his district was Socoh and the whole territory of Hepher. 

1 Ki 4:1 1 Son of Abinadab, all the Slopes of Dor. Tabaath Solomon’s daughter was his wife. 

1 Ki 4:12 Baana son of Ahilud, in Taanach and Megiddo as far as the other side of Jokmeam, and all Beth- 
Shean below Jezreel, from Beth-Shean as far as Abel-Meholah by Zarethan. 

1 Ki 4:13 Son of Geber, in Ramoth-Gilead: his district was the Encampments of Jair son of Manasseh, which are 
in Gilead; he had the region of Argob, which is in Bashan: sixty fortified towns, walled and with bolts of bronze. 

1 Ki 4:14 Ahinadab son of Iddo, in Mahanaim. 

1 Ki 4:15 Ahimaaz in Naphtali; he too married a daughter of Solomon, Basemath. 

1 Ki 4:16 Baana son of Hushai, in Asher and in the highlands. 

1 Ki 4:17 Jehoshaphat son of Paruah, in Issachar. 

1 Ki 4:18 Shimei son of Ela, in Benjamin. 

1 Ki 4:19 Geber son of Uri, in the territory of Gad, the territory of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of 
Bashan. In addition, there was one administrator in the country. 

1 Ki 4:20 Judah and Israel were numerous, as numerous as the sand on the sea-shore; they ate and drank and 
were happy. 

1 Ki 5:1 Solomon was overlord of all the kingdoms from the River to the territory of the Philistines and the 
Egyptian border. They brought tribute and served him all his life long. 

1 Ki 5:2 The daily provisions for Solomon were: thirty measures of fine flour and sixty measures of meal, 

1 Ki 5:3 ten fattened oxen, twenty free-grazing oxen, one hundred sheep, besides deer and gazelles, roebucks 
and fattened poultry. 

1 Ki 5:4 For he was master of all T ranseuphrates — of all the kings of T ranseuphrates from Tiphsah to Gaza — 
and he enjoyed peace on all his frontiers. 

1 Ki 5:5 Judah and Israel lived in security, everyone under his vine and his fig tree, from Dan to Beersheba, 
throughout the lifetime of Solomon. 

1 Ki 5:6 And Solomon had four thousand stalls of horses for his chariots and twelve thousand cavalrymen. 

1 Ki 5:7 These administrators provided the food for Solomon and for all those who were admitted by him to the 
royal table, each for the period of a month; they ensured that nothing was wanting. 

1 Ki 5:8 They also provided the barley and straw for the horses and draught animals, where required, each 
according to the quota demanded of him. 

1 Ki 5:9 God gave Solomon immense wisdom and understanding, and a heart as vast as the sand on the sea- 
shore. 

1 Ki 5: 1 0 The wisdom of Solomon surpassed the wisdom of all the sons of the East and all the wisdom of Egypt. 
1 Ki 5:1 1 He was wiser than anyone else, wiser than Ethan the Ezrahite, than the sons of Mahol, Heman, Calcol 
and Darda; his fame spread to all the surrounding nations. 

1 Ki 5:12 He composed three thousand proverbs, and his songs numbered a thousand and five. 

1 Ki 5:13 He could discourse on plants from the cedar in Lebanon to the hyssop growing on the wall; and he 
could discourse on animals and birds and reptiles and fish. 

1 Ki 5:14 Men from all nations came to hear Solomon’s wisdom, and he received gifts from all the kings in the 
world, who had heard of his wisdom. 

1 Ki 5:15 Hiram king of Tyre sent an embassy to Solomon, having learnt that he had been anointed king in 
succession to his father and because Hiram had always been a friend of David. 

1 Ki 5:16 And Solomon sent this message to Hiram, 

1 Ki 5:17 “You are aware that my father David was unable to build a temple for the name of Yahweh his God, on 
account of the wars waged on him from every side, until Yahweh put his enemies under the soles of his feet. 

1 Ki 5:18 But now Yahweh my God has given me peace on every side: not one enemy, no calamities. 

1 Ki 5:19 I propose, then, to build a temple for the name of Yahweh my God, in accordance with what Yahweh 
told my father David, ‘Your son whom I shall place on your throne to succeed you will be the man to build a 
temple for my name’. 

1 Ki 5:20 So now have cedars of Lebanon cut down for me; my servants will work with your servants, and I shall 
pay for the hire of your servants at whatever rate you fix. As you know, we have no one as skilled in felling trees 



as the Sidonians”. 

1 Ki 5:21 When Hiram heard what Solomon had said, he was delighted. “Now blessed be Yahweh”, he said, “who 
has given David a wise son to rule over this great people!”. 

1 Ki 5:22 And Hiram sent word to Solomon, “I have received your message. For my part, I shall supply you with 
all you require in the way of cedar wood and juniper. 

1 Ki 5:23 Your servants will bring these down from Lebanon to the sea, and I shall have them towed by sea to 
any place you name; I shall discharge them there, and you will take them over. For your part, you will see to the 
provisioning of my household as I desire”. 

1 Ki 5:24 So Hiram provided Solomon with all the cedar wood and juniper he wanted 

1 Ki 5:25 while Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand kor of wheat to feed his household, and twenty thousand 
kor of pure oil. Solomon gave Hiram this every year. 

1 Ki 5:26 Yahweh gave Solomon wisdom as he had promised him; good relations persisted between Solomon 
and Hiram, and the two of them concluded a treaty. 

1 Ki 5:27 King Solomon raised a levy throughout Israel for forced labour: the levy numbered thirty thousand men. 
1 Ki 5:28 He sent these to Lebanon in relays, ten thousand a month; they spent one month in Lebanon and two 
months at home. Adoram was in charge of the forced labour. 

1 Ki 5:29 Solomon also had seventy thousand porters and eighty thousand quarrymen in the mountains, 

1 Ki 5:30 as well as the administrators, officials who supervised the work, three thousand three hundred of them 
in charge of the men employed in the work. 

1 Ki 5:31 At the king’s orders they quarried huge stones, special stones for the laying of the temple foundations, 
dressed stones. 

1 Ki 5:32 Solomon’s workmen and Hiram’s workmen and the Giblites cut and assembled the wood and stone for 
the building of the Temple. 

1 Ki 6:1 In the four hundred and eightieth year after the Israelites came out of Egypt, in the fourth year of 
Solomon’s reign over Israel, in the month of Ziv, which is the second month, he began building the Temple of 
Yahweh. 

1 Ki 6:2 The temple which King Solomon built for Yahweh was sixty cubits long, twenty cubits wide and twenty- 
five high. 

1 Ki 6:3 The portico in front of the Hekal of the Temple was twenty cubits long across the width of the Temple 
and ten cubits wide along the length of the Temple. 

1 Ki 6:4 He made windows for the Temple with frames and latticework. 

1 Ki 6:5 He also built an annex against the Temple wall, right round the Hekal and Debir. He built lateral storeys 
all round; 

1 Ki 6:6 the lowest lateral storey was five cubits wide, the middle one six cubits, and the third seven cubits, for he 
had made the outside of the Temple wall correspondingly stepped back all round, so that the annex was not 
attached to the Temple walls. 

1 Ki 6:7 (The building of the T emple was done with quarry — dressed stone; no sound of hammer or pick or any 
iron tool was to be heard in the Temple while it was being built.) 

1 Ki 6:8 The entrance to the lowest storey was at the right-hand corner of the Temple; access to the middle 
storey was by a spiral staircase, and so from the middle storey to the third. 

1 Ki 6:9 Having finished building the Temple, he roofed the Temple with a coffered ceiling of cedar wood. 

1 Ki 6:10 Round the outside of the Temple he then built the annex which was five cubits high and was joined to 
the Temple by cedar-wood beams. 

1 Ki 6:1 1 And the word of Yahweh came to Solomon, 

1 Ki 6:12 “With regard to this temple which you are now building, if you follow my statutes and obey my 
ordinances and faithfully follow my commandments, I shall fulfil the promise which I made about you to your 
father David. 

1 Ki 6:13 And I shall make my home among the Israelites and never forsake Israel my people”. 

1 Ki 6:14 Solomon finished building the Temple. 

1 Ki 6:15 He lined the inside of the Temple walls with panels of cedar wood-panelling them on the inside from 
the floor of the Temple to the beams of the ceiling — and laid the floor of the Temple with juniper planks. 

1 Ki 6:16 The twenty cubits measured from the end of the Temple he built of cedar planks from the floor to the 
beams, and this part was reserved as the Debir, the Holy of Holies. 

1 Ki 6:17 The Temple measured forty cubits — the Hekal — in front of the Debir. 

1 Ki 6:18 There was cedar wood round the inside of the Temple, ornamentally carved with gourds and rosettes; 
all was cedar wood, with no stone showing. 

1 Ki 6:19 In the inner part of the Temple he designed a Debir, to contain the ark of the covenant of Yahweh. 

1 Ki 6:20 The Debir was twenty cubits long, twenty cubits wide, and twenty high, and he overlaid it on the inside 
with pure gold. He made an altar of cedar wood 



1 Ki 6:21 in front of the Debir and overlaid it with gold. 

1 Ki 6:22 He overlaid the whole Temple with gold, the whole Temple entirely. 

1 Ki 6:23 In the Debir he made two great winged creatures of wild-olive wood…It was ten cubits high. 

1 Ki 6:24 One winged creature’s wing was five cubits long and the other wing five cubits: ten cubits from wing tip 
to wing tip. 

1 Ki 6:25 The other winged creature also measured ten cubits; both had the same measurements and the same 
shape. 

1 Ki 6:26 The height of one was the same as the other’s. 

1 Ki 6:27 He placed them in the middle of the inner chamber; their wings were spread out so that the wing of one 

touched one of the walls and the wing of the other touched the other wall, while their wings met in the middle of 
the chamber wing to wing. 

1 Ki 6:28 And he overlaid them with gold. 

1 Ki 6:29 All round the Temple walls he carved figures of winged creatures, palm trees and rosettes, both inside 
and outside. 

1 Ki 6:30 He overlaid the floor of the Temple with gold, both inside and outside. 

1 Ki 6:31 He made the door of the Debir with uprights of wild-olive wood, and door jambs with five indented 

sections, 

1 Ki 6:32 and the two leaves of wild-olive wood. He carved figures of great winged creatures, palm trees and 
rosettes which he overlaid with gold, and he gilded winged creatures and palm trees. 

1 Ki 6:33 Similarly, he made uprights of wild-olive wood for the door of the Hekal, and door jambs with four 
indented sections, 

1 Ki 6:34 and the two leaves of juniper: one leaf had two ribs binding it, and the other had two ribs binding it. 

1 Ki 6:35 He carved winged creatures, palm trees and rosettes, which he overlaid with gold laid evenly over the 
carvings. 

1 Ki 6:36 He built the wall of the inner court in three courses of dressed stone and one course of cedar beams. 

1 Ki 6:37 In the fourth year, in the month of Ziv, the foundations of the Temple were laid; 

1 Ki 6:38 in the eleventh year, in the month of Bui — that is, the eighth month — the Temple was completed 
exactly as it had been planned and designed. Solomon took seven years to build it. 

1 Ki 7:1 As regards his palace, Solomon spent thirteen years on it before the building was completed. 

1 Ki 7:2 He built the House of the Forest of Lebanon, a hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide, and thirty cubits 
high, on four rows of cedar-wood pillars, 

1 Ki 7:3 with lengths of cedar wood laid horizontally on the pillars. The upper part was panelled with cedar right 
down to the tie-beams on forty-five pillars, fifteen in each row. 

1 Ki 7:4 There were three rows of window-frames, with the windows corresponding to one another at three 
levels. 

1 Ki 7:5 All the doorways and windows were rectangular, with the windows corresponding to one another at 
three levels. 

1 Ki 7:6 He also made the Colonnade, fifty cubits long and thirty cubits broad, with a cornice in front. 

1 Ki 7:7 He also made the Hall of the Throne where he used to dispense justice, that is, the Hall of Justice; it was 
panelled in cedar from floor to beams. 

1 Ki 7:8 His own living quarters, in the other court and inwards from the Hall, were of the same construction. And 
there was a house similar to this Hall for Pharaoh’s daughter whom he had taken in marriage. 

1 Ki 7:9 All these buildings were of special stones cut to measure, trimmed on the inner and outer sides with the 
saw, from the foundations to the coping- 

1 Ki 7:10 the foundations were of special stones, huge stones, often and eight cubits, 

1 Ki 7:1 1 and, above these, special stones, cut to measure, and cedar wood- 

1 Ki 7:12 and, on the outside, the great court had three courses of dressed stone round it and one course of 
cedar beams; so also had the inner court of the Temple of Yahweh and the vestibule of the Temple. 

1 Ki 7:13 King Solomon sent for Hiram of Tyre; 

1 Ki 7:14 he was the son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali, but his father had been a Tyrian, a bronzeworker. 

He was a highly intelligent craftsman, skilled in all types of bronzework. He came to King Solomon and did all 
this work for him. 

1 Ki 7:15 He cast the two bronze pillars; the height of one pillar was eighteen cubits, and a cord twelve cubits 
long gave the measurement of its girth; so also was the second pillar. 

1 Ki 7:16 He made two capitals of cast bronze for the tops of the pillars; the height of one capital was five cubits, 
and the height of the other five cubits. 

1 Ki 7:17 He made two sets of filigree to cover the moulding of the two capitals surmounting the pillars, one 
filigree for one capital and one filigree for the other. 

1 Ki 7:18 He also made pomegranates: two rows of them round each filigree, four hundred in all, 



1 Ki 7:19 The capitals surrounding the pillars were lily-shaped. 

1 Ki 7:20 applied on the raised moulding behind the filigree; there were two hundred pomegranates round one 
capital and the same round the other capital. 

1 Ki 7:21 He erected the pillars in front of the portico of the Temple, he erected the right-hand pillar and named it 
Jachin; he erected the left-hand pillar and named it Boaz. 

1 Ki 7:22 Thus, the work on the pillars was completed. 

1 Ki 7:23 He made the Sea of cast metal, ten cubits from rim to rim, circular in shape and five cubits high; a cord 
thirty cubits long gave the measurement of its girth. 

1 Ki 7:24 Under its rim and completely encircling it were gourds surrounding the Sea; over a length of thirty 
cubits the gourds were in two rows, of one and the same casting with the rest. 

1 Ki 7:25 It rested on twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing west, three facing south, three facing east; on 
these, their hindquarters all turned inwards, stood the Sea. 

1 Ki 7:26 It was a hand’s breadth in thickness, and its rim was shaped like the rim of a cup, lily-shaped. It could 
hold two thousand measures. 

1 Ki 7:27 He made the ten bronze stands; each stand was four cubits long, four cubits wide, and three high. 

1 Ki 7:28 They were designed as follows; they had an undercarriage and crosspieces to the undercarriage. 

1 Ki 7:29 On the crosspieces of the undercarriage were lions and bulls and winged creatures, and on top of the 
undercarriage was a support; under the lions and oxen there were scrolls in the style of… 

1 Ki 7:30 Each stand had four bronze wheels with bronze axles; its four feet had shoulderings under the basin, 
and the shoulderings were cast… 

1 Ki 7:31 Its mouth measured one and a half cubits from where the shoulderings met to the top; its mouth was 
round like a stand for a vessel, and on the mouth there were engravings too; the crosspieces, however, were 
rectangular and not round. 

1 Ki 7:32 The four wheels were under the crosspieces. The axles of the wheels were inside the stands; the 
height of the wheels was one and a half cubits. 

1 Ki 7:33 The wheels were designed like chariot wheels: their axles, felloes, spokes and naves had all been cast. 
1 Ki 7:34 There were four shoulderings at the four corners of each stand: the stand and the shoulderings were all 
of a piece. 

1 Ki 7:35 At the top of the stand there was a support, circular in shape and half a cubit high; and on top of the 
stand there were lugs. The crosspieces were of a piece with the stand. 

1 Ki 7:36 On the bands he engraved winged creatures and lions and palm leaves… and scrolls right round. 

1 Ki 7:37 He made the ten stands like this: the same casting and the same measurements for all. 

1 Ki 7:38 He made ten bronze basins; each basin held forty measures and each basin measured four cubits, one 
basin to each of the ten stands. 

1 Ki 7:39 He arranged the stands, five on the right-hand side of the Temple, five on the left-hand side of the 
Temple; the Sea he placed on the right-hand side of the Temple, to the south east. 

1 Ki 7:40 Hiram made the ash containers, the scoops and the sprinkling bowls. He finished all the work that he 
did for King Solomon on the Temple of Yahweh: 

1 Ki 7:41 Two pillars; the two mouldings of the capitals surrounding the pillars; the two sets of filigree to cover 
the two mouldings of the capitals surmounting the pillars; 

1 Ki 7:42 the four hundred pomegranates for the two sets of filigree — two rows of pomegranates for each set of 
filigree; 

1 Ki 7:43 the ten stands and the ten basins on the stands; 

1 Ki 7:44 the one Sea and the twelve oxen beneath the Sea; 

1 Ki 7:45 the ash containers, the scoops, and sprinkling bowls. All these objects made by Hiram for King 
Solomon for the Temple of Yahweh were of burnished bronze. 

1 Ki 7:46 He made them by the process of sand casting, in the plain of the Jordan between Succoth and 
Zarethan. 

1 Ki 7:47 There were so many of them, that the weight of the bronze was never calculated. 

1 Ki 7:48 Solomon made all the objects designed for the Temple of Yahweh: the golden altar and the gold table 
for the loaves of permanent offering; 

1 Ki 7:49 the lamp-stands, five on the right and five on the left in front of the Debir, of pure gold; the floral work, 
the lamps, the tongs, of gold; 

1 Ki 7:50 the basins, the snuffers, the sprinkling bowls, the incense ladles and the pans, of real gold; the door 
panels — for the inner shrine — that is, the Holy of Holies — and for the Hekal, of gold. 

1 Ki 7:51 Thus all the work done by King Solomon for the Temple of Yahweh was completed, and Solomon 
brought in the gifts which his father David had consecrated; and he had the silver, the gold and the utensils put 
into the treasuries of the Temple of Yahweh. 

1 Ki 8:1 Solomon then summoned the elders of Israel to Jerusalem to bring the ark of the covenant of Yahweh 



up from the City of David, that is, Zion. 

1 Ki 8:2 All the men of Israel assembled round King Solomon in the month of Ethanim, at the time of the feast 
(that is, the seventh month). 

1 Ki 8:3 When all the elders of Israel had arrived, the priests took up the ark 
1 Ki 8:4 and the Tent of Meeting and all the sacred utensils which were in the Tent. 

1 Ki 8:5 King Solomon and all Israel, present with him before the ark, sacrificed countless, innumerable sheep 
and oxen. 

1 Ki 8:6 The priests brought the ark of the covenant of Yahweh to its place, in the Debir of the Temple, that is, in 
the Holy of Holies, under the wings of the winged creatures 

1 Ki 8:7 for the winged creatures spread their wings over the place where the ark stood, forming a canopy over 
the ark and its shafts. 

1 Ki 8:8 These were so long, however, that the ends of the shafts could be seen from the Holy Place in front of 
the Debir, though they could not be seen from outside. They are still there today. 

1 Ki 8:9 There was nothing in the ark except the two stone tablets which Moses had placed in it at Horeb, the 
tablets of the covenant which Yahweh made with the Israelites when they came out of Egypt. 

1 Ki 8:10 Now when the priests came out of the Holy Place, the cloud filled the Temple of Yahweh, 

1 Ki 8:1 1 and because of the cloud the priests could not stay and perform their duties. For the glory of Yahweh 
filled the Temple of Yahweh. 

1 Ki 8:12 Then Solomon said: Yahweh has chosen to dwell in thick cloud. 

1 Ki 8:13 I have built you a princely dwelling, a residence for you for ever. 

1 Ki 8:14 The king then turned round and blessed the whole assembly of Israel, while the whole assembly of 
Israel stood. 

1 Ki 8:15 He said, “Blessed be Yahweh, God of Israel, who has carried out by his hand what he promised with 
his mouth to my father David, when he said, 

1 Ki 8:16 ‘From the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt I chose no city, in any of the tribes of Israel, to 
have a temple built where my name should be; but I did choose David to rule my people Israel’. 

1 Ki 8:17 My father David had set his heart on building a temple for the name of Yahweh, God of Israel, 

1 Ki 8:18 but Yahweh said to my father David, ‘You have set your heart on building a temple for my name, and 
in this you have done well; 

1 Ki 8:19 and yet, you are not the man to build the temple; but your son, yet to be born to you, will be the one to 
build the temple for my name’. 

1 Ki 8:20 Yahweh has kept the promise which he made: I have succeeded my father David and am seated on 
the throne of Israel, as Yahweh promised; I have built the temple for the name of Yahweh, God of Israel, 

1 Ki 8:21 and in it I have made a place for the ark containing the covenant of Yahweh which he made with our 
ancestors when he brought them out of Egypt”. 

1 Ki 8:22 Then, in the presence of the whole assembly of Israel, Solomon stood facing the altar of Yahweh and, 
stretching out his hands towards heaven, 

1 Ki 8:23 said, “Yahweh, God of Israel, there is no god like you in heaven above or on earth beneath, as loyal to 
the covenant and faithful in love to your servants as long as they walk wholeheartedly in your way. 

1 Ki 8:24 You have kept the promise you made to your servant, my father David, as you promised him you 
would. Today you have carried it out by your power. 

1 Ki 8:25 And now, Yahweh, God of Israel, keep the promise which you made to your servant David when you 
said, ‘You will never lack for a man to sit before me on the throne of Israel, provided that your sons are careful 
how they behave, walking before me as you yourself have done’. 

1 Ki 8:26 So now, God of Israel, let the words come true which you spoke to your servant, my father David. 

1 Ki 8:27 Yet will God really live with human beings on earth? Why, the heavens, the highest of the heavens, 
cannot contain you. How much less this temple built by me! 

1 Ki 8:28 Even so, listen favourably to the prayer and entreaty of your servant, Yahweh my God; listen to the cry 
and to the prayer which your servant makes to you today: 

1 Ki 8:29 day and night may your eyes watch over this temple, over this place of which you have said, ‘My name 
will be there’. Listen to the prayer which your servant offers in this place. 

1 Ki 8:30 “Listen to the entreaty of your servant and of your people Israel; whenever they pray in this place, listen 
from the place where you reside in heaven; and when you hear, forgive. 

1 Ki 8:31 “If someöne has wronged his neighbour and a curse is laid on him to make him swear an oath here 
before your altar in this Temple, 

1 Ki 8:32 then listen from the place where you reside in heaven and do justice between your servants: 
condemning the guilty one by making him suffer for his conduct, and acquitting the upright by rewarding him as 
his uprightness deserves. 

1 Ki 8:33 “When your people Israel are defeated by the enemy because they have sinned against you, but then 



return to you and acknowledge your name, and pray and seek your favours in this Temple, 

1 Ki 8:34 then listen from the place where you reside in heaven; forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring 
them back to the country which you gave to their ancestors. 

1 Ki 8:35 “When the heavens are shut and there is no rain because they have sinned against you, if they pray in 
this place and praise your name and, having been humbled by you, desist from their sin, 

1 Ki 8:36 then listen from the place where you reside in heaven and forgive the sin of your servant and your 
people Israel — for you are constantly showing them the good way which they must follow — and send rain on 
your country, which you have given to your people as their heritage. 

1 Ki 8:37 “Should there be famine in the country, or pestilence, wind-blast or mildew, locust or caterpillar; should 
their enemy lay siege to one of their gates; should there be any plague or any disease: 

1 Ki 8:38 whatever be the prayer or entreaty of any individual aware of a particular affliction: when that person 
stretches out the hands towards this Temple, 

1 Ki 8:39 then listen from heaven where you reside; forgive and, since you know what is in the heart, deal with 
each as their conduct deserves — for you alone know what is in every human heart- 

1 Ki 8:40 so that they may reverence you throughout their lives in the country which you gave to our ancestors. 

1 Ki 8:41 “Even the foreigner, not belonging to your people Israel but coming from a distant country, attracted by 
your name- 

1 Ki 8:42 for they too will hear of your name, of your mighty hand and outstretched arm — if a foreigner comes 
and prays in this Temple, 

1 Ki 8:43 listen from heaven where you reside, and grant all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the peoples 
of the earth may acknowledge your name and, like your people Israel, revere you and know that this Temple, 
which I have built, bears your name. 

1 Ki 8:44 “If your people go out to war against the enemy, on whatever missions you send them, and they pray to 
Yahweh, turning towards the city which you have chosen and towards the Temple which I have built for your 
name, 

1 Ki 8:45 then listen from heaven to their prayer and their entreaty, and uphold their cause. 

1 Ki 8:46 “When they sin against you — for there is no one who does not sin — and you are angry with them and 
abandon them to the enemy, and their captors carry them off to a hostile country, be it far away or near, 

1 Ki 8:47 if they come to their senses in the country to which they have been taken as captives and repent and 
entreat you in the country of their captors, saying, ‘We have sinned, we have acted perversely and wickedly’, 

1 Ki 8:48 and turn back to you with all their heart and soul in the country of the enemies who have taken them 
captive, and pray to you, turning towards the country which you gave to their ancestors, towards the city which 
you have chosen and towards the Temple which I have built for your name, 

1 Ki 8:49 listen to their prayer and their entreaty from the place where you reside in heaven, uphold their case, 

1 Ki 8:50 forgive your people for having sinned against you and for all the crimes against you of which they have 
been guilty, and allow them to arouse the pity of their captors so that these may have pity on them: 

1 Ki 8:51 for they are your people and your heritage whom you brought out of Egypt, that iron foundry! 

1 Ki 8:52 “May your eyes be open to the entreaty of your servant and the entreaty of your people Israel, to listen 
to them, whatever they ask of you. 

1 Ki 8:53 For you it was who set them apart from all the peoples of the earth to be your heritage, as you declared 
through your servant Moses when you brought our ancestors out of Egypt, Lord Yahweh”. 

1 Ki 8:54 When Solomon had finished offering to Yahweh this whole prayer and entreaty, he rose from where he 
was kneeling with hands stretched out towards heaven before the altar of Yahweh, 

1 Ki 8:55 and stood upright. And in a loud voice he blessed the whole assembly of Israel. 

1 Ki 8:56 “Blessed be Yahweh”, he said, “who has granted rest to his people Israel, keeping all his promises. Of 
all the promises of good that he made through his servant Moses, not one has failed. 

1 Ki 8:57 May Yahweh our God be with us, as he was with our ancestors; may he never desert us or cast us off. 

1 Ki 8:58 May he turn our hearts towards him so that we may follow all his ways and keep the commandments 
and laws and ordinances which he gave to our ancestors. 

1 Ki 8:59 May these words of mine, of my entreaty before Yahweh, be present with Yahweh our God day and 
night, that he may uphold the cause of his servant and the cause of Israel his people, as each day requires, 

1 Ki 8:60 so that all the peoples of the earth may come to know that Yahweh is God indeed and that there is no 
other. 

1 Ki 8:61 May your hearts be wholly with Yahweh our God, following his laws and keeping his commandments 
as at this present day”. 

1 Ki 8:62 The king and all Israel with him offered sacrifice before Yahweh. 

1 Ki 8:63 Solomon offered a communion sacrifice of twenty-two thousand oxen and a hundred and twenty 
thousand sheep to Yahweh; and thus the king and all the Israelites dedicated the Temple of Yahweh. 

1 Ki 8:64 On the same day the king consecrated the middle part of the court in front of the Temple of Yahweh; 



for that was where he presented the burnt offerings, oblations and fatty parts of the communion sacrifices, since 
the bronze altar which stood before Yahweh was too small to hold the burnt offering, oblation and the fatty parts 
of the communion sacrifice. 

1 Ki 8:65 And then Solomon and with him all Israel from the Pass of Hamath to the Torrent of Egypt — a great 
assembly — celebrated the feast before Yahweh our God for seven days. 

1 Ki 8:66 On the eighth day he dismissed the people, who bade farewell to the king and went home joyful and 
happy of heart over all the goodness which Yahweh had shown to his servant and his people Israel. 

1 Ki 9:1 When Solomon had finished building the Temple of Yahweh, the royal palace and everything else which 
Solomon had wanted to do, 

1 Ki 9:2 Yahweh appeared to Solomon a second time, as he had appeared to him at Gibeon. 

1 Ki 9:3 Yahweh said to him, “I have heard your prayer and the entreaty which you have before me. I consecrate 
this temple which you have built: I place my name there for ever; my eyes and my heart will be there always. 

1 Ki 9:4 For your part, if you walk before me in innocence of heart and in honesty, like your father David, if you 
do everything that I command and keep my laws and my ordinances, 

1 Ki 9:5 I shall make your royal throne secure over Israel for ever, as I promised your father David when I said, 
‘You will never lack for a man on the throne of Israel’. 

1 Ki 9:6 But if you turn away from me, either you or your descendants, and instead of keeping my 
commandments and laws which I have laid down for you, you go and serve other gods and worship them, 

1 Ki 9:7 then I shall banish Israel from the country which I have given them, and shall disown this Temple which I 
have consecrated for my name, and Israel will be a proverb and a byword among all peoples. 

1 Ki 9:8 As for this once-exalted Temple, everyone who passes by will be appalled, and they will whistle and say, 
‘Why has Yahweh treated this country and this Temple like this?’. 

1 Ki 9:9 And the answer will be, ‘Because they deserted Yahweh their God who brought their ancestors out of 
Egypt, and they adopted other gods and worshipped and served them; that is why Yahweh has brought all these 
disasters on them’”. 

1 Ki 9:10 At the end of the twenty years that it took Solomon to erect the two buildings, the Temple of Yahweh 
and the royal palace 

1 Ki 9:1 1 (Hiram king of Tyre had provided Solomon with all the cedar wood, juniper wood and gold that he 
wanted), King Solomon gave Hiram twenty towns in the territory of Galilee. 

1 Ki 9:12 But when Hiram came from Tyre to view the towns that Solomon had given him, he was not pleased 
with them. 

1 Ki 9:13 He said, “What kind of towns are these you have given me, brother?”. And to this day they are known as 
‘cabul-land’. 

1 Ki 9:14 Hiram sent the king one hundred and twenty talents of gold. 

1 Ki 9:15 This is an account of the forced labour levied by King Solomon for building the Temple of Yahweh, his 
own palace, the Millo and the fortifications of Jerusalem, Hazor, Megiddo, Gezer 

1 Ki 9:16 (Pharaoh king of Egypt mounted an expedition, captured Gezer, burnt it down and massacred the 
Canaanites living there; he then gave the town as a dowry to his daughter, Solomon’s wife, 

1 Ki 9:17 and Solomon rebuilt Gezer), Lower Beth-Horon, 

1 Ki 9:18 Baalath, Tamar in the desert, inside the country, 

1 Ki 9:19 all Solomon’s storage towns owned by Solomon, all the towns for his chariots and horses, and 
whatever Solomon was pleased to build in Jerusalem, in the Lebanon and in all the countries under his rule. 

1 Ki 9:20 All those who survived of the Amorite, Hittite, Perizzite, Hivite and Jebusite peoples, who were not 
Israelites- 

1 Ki 9:21 their descendants still remaining in the country on whom the Israelites had not been able to enforce the 
curse of destruction — these Solomon levied as forced labourers, as is still the case today. 

1 Ki 9:22 Solomon did not, however, impose forced labour on the Israelites; for they were soldiers, his officials, 
his administrators, his officers and his chariot and cavalry commanders. 

1 Ki 9:23 There were five hundred and fifty officials in charge of the foremen over Solomon’s work, who 
supervised the people employed on the work. 

1 Ki 9:24 After Pharaoh’s daughter had moved from the City of David up to the palace which he had built for her, 
he then built the Millo. 

1 Ki 9:25 Three times a year Solomon presented burnt offerings and communion sacrifices on the altar which he 
had built for Yahweh and set his burnt offerings smoking before Yahweh. Thus he completed the Temple. 

1 Ki 9:26 King Solomon equipped a fleet at Ezion-Geber, which is near Elath on the shores of the Red Sea, in 
Edom. 

1 Ki 9:27 For this fleet Hiram sent men of his, experienced sailors, to serve with those in Solomon’s service. 

1 Ki 9:28 They went to Ophir and took on four hundred and twenty talents of gold, which they brought back to 
Solomon. 



1 Ki 10:1 The queen of Sheba heard of Solomon’s fame and came to test him with difficult questions. 

1 Ki 10:2 She arrived in Jerusalem with a very large retinue, with camels laden with spices and an immense 
quantity of gold and precious stones. Having reached Solomon, she discussed with him everything that she had 
in mind, 

1 Ki 10:3 and Solomon had an answer for all her questions; not one of them was too obscure for the king to 
answer for her. 

1 Ki 10:4 When the queen of Sheba saw how very wise Solomon was, the palace which he had built, 

1 Ki 1 0:5 the food at his table, the accommodation for his officials, the organisation of his staff and the way they 
were dressed, his cupbearers, and the burnt offerings which he presented in the Temple of Yahweh, it left her 
breathless, 

1 Ki 10:6 and she said to the king, The report I heard in my own country about your wisdom in handling your 
affairs was true then! 

1 Ki 10:7 Until I came and saw for myself, I did not believe the reports, but clearly I was told less than half: for 
wisdom and prosperity, you surpass what was reported to me. 

1 Ki 10:8 How fortunate your wives are! How fortunate these courtiers of yours, continually in attendance on you 
and listening to your wisdom! 

1 Ki 10:9 Blessed be Yahweh your God who has shown you his favour by setting you on the throne of Israel! 
Because of Yahweh’s everlasting love for Israel, he has made you king to administer law and justice”. 

1 Ki 10:10 And she presented the king with a hundred and twenty talents of gold and great quantities of spices 
and precious stones; no such wealth of spices ever came again as those which the queen of Sheba gave to King 
Solomon. 

1 Ki 10:1 1 Similarly, Hiram’s fleet, which brought the gold from Ophir, also brought back great cargoes of almug 
timber and precious stones. 

1 Ki 10:12 Of the almug timber the king made supports for the Temple of Yahweh and for the royal palace, and 
harps and lyres for the musicians; no more of this almug timber has since come or been seen to this day. 

1 Ki 10:13 And King Solomon, in his turn, presented the queen of Sheba with everything that she expressed a 
wish for, besides those presents which he gave her with a munificence worthy of King Solomon. After which, she 
went home to her own country, she and her servants. 

1 Ki 10:14 The weight of gold received annually by Solomon amounted to six hundred and sixty-six talents of 
gold, 

1 Ki 10:15 besides what tolls and foreign trade, as well as everything the Arab kings and the provincial governors 
brought in. 

1 Ki 10:16 King Solomon made two hundred great shields of beaten gold, six hundred shekels of gold going into 
one shield; 

1 Ki 10:17 also three hundred small shields of beaten gold, three mina of gold going into one shield; and the king 
put these into the House of the Forest of Lebanon. 

1 Ki 10:18 The king also made a great ivory throne which he overlaid with refined gold. 

1 Ki 10:19 The throne had six steps, a back with a rounded top, and arms on each side of the seat; two lions 
stood beside the arms, 

1 Ki 10:20 and twelve lions stood on each side of the six steps. Nothing like it has ever been made in any other 
kingdom. 

1 Ki 10:21 All King Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the plate in the House of the Forest of 
Lebanon was of pure gold; silver was little thought of in Solomon’s days, 

1 Ki 10:22 since the king had a fleet of Tarshish at sea with Hiram’s fleet, and once every three years the fleet of 
Tarshish would come back laden with gold and silver, ivory, apes and baboons. 

1 Ki 10:23 For riches and for wisdom, King Solomon surpassed all kings on earth, 

1 Ki 10:24 and the whole world consulted Solomon to hear the wisdom which God had implanted in his heart; 

1 Ki 10:25 and everyone would bring a present with him: things made of silver, things made of gold, robes, 
armour, spices, horses and mules; and this went on year after year. 

1 Ki 10:26 Solomon then built up a force of chariots and cavalry; he had one thousand four hundred chariots and 
twelve thousand horses, these he stationed in the chariot towns and near the king in Jerusalem. 

1 Ki 10:27 In Jerusalem the king made silver as common as stones, and cedar wood as plentiful as sycamore in 
the lowlands. 

1 Ki 10:28 Solomon’s horses were imported from Muzur and Cilicia. The king’s dealers acquired them from 
Cilicia at the prevailing price. 

1 Ki 10:29 A chariot was imported from Egypt for six hundred silver shekels and a horse from Cilicia for a 
hundred and fifty. They also supplied the Hittite and Aramaean kings, who all used them as middlemen. 

1 Ki 11:1 King Solomon loved many foreign women: not only Pharaoh’s daughter but Moabites, Edomites, 
Sidonians and Hittites, 



1 Ki 1 1 :2 from those peoples of whom Yahweh had said to the Israelites, “You are not to go among them nor 
they among you, or they will be sure to sway your hearts to their own gods”. But Solomon was deeply attached to 
them. 

1 Ki 11:3 He had seven hundred wives of royal rank and three hundred concubines. 

1 Ki 11:4 When Solomon grew old his wives swayed his heart to other gods; and his heart was not wholly with 
Yahweh his God as his father David’s had been. 

1 Ki 11:5 Solomon became a follower of Astarte, the goddess of the Sidonians, and of Milcom, the Ammonite 
abomination. 

1 Ki 1 1 :6 He did what was displeasing to Yahweh, and was not a wholehearted follower of Yahweh, as his father 
David had been. 

1 Ki 11:7 Then it was that Solomon built a high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, on the mountain to 
the east of Jerusalem, and to Milcom, the abomination of the Ammonites. 

1 Ki 11:8 He did the same for all his foreign wives, who offered incense and sacrifice to their gods. 

1 Ki 11:9 Yahweh was angry with Solomon because his heart had turned away from Yahweh, God of Israel, who 
had twice appeared to him 

1 Ki 11:10 and had forbidden him to follow other gods; but he did not carry out Yahweh’s order. 

1 Ki 11:11 Yahweh therefore said to Solomon, “Since you have behaved like this and have not kept my covenant 
or the laws which I laid down for you, I shall tear the kingdom away from you and give it to one of your servants. 

1 Ki 11:12 For your father David’s sake, however, I shall not do this during your lifetime, but shall tear it out of 
your son’s hands. 

1 Ki 11:13 Even so, I shall not tear the whole kingdom from him. For the sake of my servant David, and for the 
sake of Jerusalem which I have chosen, I shall leave your son one tribe”. 

1 Ki 11:14 Yahweh raised an enemy against Solomon, Hadad the Edomite, of the kingly stock of Edom. 

1 Ki 11:15 After David had crushed Edom, Joab the army commander had gone to bury the dead and had 
slaughtered the entire male population of Edom 

1 Ki 11:16 (Joab stayed there with all Israel for six months until he had exterminated the entire male population 
of Edom), 

1 Ki 11:17 but Hadad with a number of Edomites in his father’s service had fled to Egypt. Hadad had been only a 
boy at the time. 

1 Ki 11:18 They set out from Midian, and on reaching Paran, took a number of men from Paran with them and 
went on to Egypt, to Pharaoh the king of Egypt, who provided him with a house, undertook to maintain him, and 
assigned him an estate. 

1 Ki 11:19 Hadad became a great favourite of Pharaoh who gave him his own wife’s sister in marriage, the sister 
of the Great Lady Tahpenes. 

1 Ki 1 1 :20 The sister of Tahpenes bore him his son Genubath whom Tahpenes brought up in Pharaoh’s palace, 
Genubath living in Pharaoh’s palace with Pharaoh’s own children. 

1 Ki 1 1 :21 But when news reached Hadad in Egypt that David had fallen asleep with his ancestors and that Joab 
the army commander was dead, he said to Pharaoh, “Give me leave to go that I may return to my own country”. 

1 Ki 1 1 :22 “What do you lack here with me”, Pharaoh said, “for you to want to go back to your country?”. “Nothing”, 
he replied, “but please let me go. “Hence the harm which Hadad caused: he loathed Israel and ruled Edom. 

1 Ki 1 1 :23 God raised a second enemy against Solomon, Rezon son of Eliada. He had fled from his master, 
Hadadezer king of Zobah. 

1 Ki 1 1 :24 A number of men having rallied to him, he became leader of a marauding band (which was then 
massacred by David). Rezon captured Damascus and settled there and became king of Damascus. 

1 Ki 1 1 :25 He was hostile to Israel as long as Solomon lived. 

1 Ki 1 1 :26 Jeroboam was the son of Nebat, an Ephraimite from Zeredah; the name of his mother, a widow, was 
Zeruah; he was in Solomon’s service but revolted against the king. 

1 Ki 1 1 :27 This is the account of his revolt. Solomon was building the Millo and closing the breach in the City of 
David his father. 

1 Ki 1 1 :28 Now this Jeroboam was a man of great energy; Solomon, noticing how the young man set about his 
work, put him in charge of all the forced labour of the House of Joseph. 

1 Ki 1 1 :29 One day when Jeroboam had gone out of Jerusalem, the prophet Ahijah of Shiloh accosted him on 
the road. Ahijah was wearing a new cloak; the two of them were in the open country by themselves. 

1 Ki 1 1 :30 Ahijah took the new cloak which he was wearing and tore it into twelve strips, 

1 Ki 1 1 :31 saying to Jeroboam: “Take ten strips for yourself, for Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘I am going to 
tear the kingdom from Solomon’s hand and give ten tribes to you. 

1 Ki 1 1 :32 He will keep one tribe for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city which I 
have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel; 

1 Ki 1 1 :33 for he has forsaken me to worship Astarte the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of Moab, 



Milcom the god of the Ammonites; he has not followed my ways by doing what I regard as right, or by keeping 
my laws and ordinances as his father David did. 

1 Ki 1 1 :34 But it is not from his hands that I will take the kingdom, since I have made him a prince for as long as 
he lives, for the sake of my servant David who kept my commandments and laws. 

1 Ki 1 1 :35 I shall, however, take the kingdom from the hand of his son, and I shall give it to you, that is, the ten 
tribes. 

1 Ki 1 1 :36 I shall give one tribe to his son, so that my servant David may always have a lamp in my presence in 
Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen as a dwelling-place for my name. 

1 Ki 1 1 :37 You nonetheless I shall appoint to rule over as much as you wish, and you will be king of Israel. 

1 Ki 1 1 :38 If you listen to all my orders and follow my ways, by doing what I regard as right and by keeping my 
laws and commandments as my servant David did, then I shall be with you and shall build you as enduring a 
dynasty as the one which I built for David. I shall give Israel to you, 

1 Ki 1 1 :39 and I shall humble the descendants of David, but not for ever’”. 

1 Ki 1 1 :40 Solomon tried to kill Jeroboam but he made off and fled to Egypt, to Shishak king of Egypt, and he 
remained in Egypt until Solomon’s death. 

1 Ki 1 1 :41 The rest of the history of Solomon, his entire career, his wisdom, is this not recorded in the Book of 
the Annals of Solomon? 

1 Ki 1 1 :42 Solomon’s reign in Jerusalem over all Israel lasted forty years. 

1 Ki 1 1 :43 When Solomon fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in the City of David his father; his son 
Rehoboam succeeded him. 

1 Ki 12:1 Rehoboam then went to Shechem, all Israel having come to Shechem to proclaim him king. 

1 Ki 12:2 (As soon as Jeroboam son of Nebat heard the news — he was still in Egypt, where he had taken refuge 
from King Solomon — he returned from Egypt. 

1 Ki 12:3 They now sent for him, and Jeroboam and the whole assembly of Israel came.) And they spoke as 
follows to Rehoboam, 

1 Ki 12:4 “Your father laid a cruel yoke on us; if you will lighten your father’s cruel slavery, that heavy yoke which 
he imposed on us, we are willing to serve you”. 

1 Ki 12:5 He said to them, “Go away for three days and then come back to me”. And the people went away. 

1 Ki 12:6 King Rehoboam then consulted the elders who had been in attendance on his father Solomon while he 
was alive, and said, “How do you advise me to answer this people?”. 

1 Ki 12:7 They replied, “If you become the servant of this people today, and submit to them and give them a fair 
reply, then they will remain your servants for ever”. 

1 Ki 12:8 But he rejected the advice given him by the elders and consulted the young men in attendance on him, 
who had grown up with him. 

1 Ki 12:9 He said, “How do you advise us to answer these people who have been saying, ‘Lighten the yoke 
which your father imposed on us!?’ “ 

1 Ki 12:10 The young men who had grown up with him replied, “This is the way to answer these people who 
have been saying, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, you must lighten it for us!’. This is the right thing to say to 
them, ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s loins. 

1 Ki 12:1 1 Although my father laid a heavy yoke on you, I shall make it heavier still. My father controlled you with 
the whip, but I shall apply a spiked lash!’”. 

1 Ki 12:12 On the third day Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam in obedience to the king’s 
instruction: “Come back to me in three days’ time”. 

1 Ki 12:13 And the king gave the people a harsh answer, rejecting the advice given him by the elders 
1 Ki 12:14 and speaking to them as the young men had recommended, “My father made your yoke heavy, I shall 
make it heavier still! My father controlled you with the whip, but I shall apply a spiked lash!”. 

1 Ki 12:15 Thus the king refused to listen to the people, and this was brought about by Yahweh to fulfil the 
promise which he had made through Ahijah of Shiloh to Jeroboam son of Nebat. 

1 Ki 12:16 When all Israel saw that the king refused to listen to them, the people answered the king thus: What 
share have we in David? -No heritage in the son of Jesse! Away to your tents, Israel! Now look after your own 
House, David! So Israel went home again. 

1 Ki 12:17 Rehoboam, however, reigned over those Israelites who lived in the towns of Judah. 

1 Ki 12:18 When King Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was in charge of forced labour, all Israel stoned him to 
death, while King Rehoboam managed to mount his chariot and escape to Jerusalem. 

1 Ki 12:19 And Israel has remained in rebellion against the House of David from that day to this. 

1 Ki 1 2:20 When all Israel heard that Jeroboam had returned, they summoned him to the assembly and made 
him king of all Israel; no one remained loyal to the House of David, except the tribe of Judah. 

1 Ki 12:21 When Rehoboam reached Jerusalem he mustered the whole House of Judah and the tribe of 
Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand picked warriors, to fight the House of Israel and win back the kingdom 



for Rehoboam son of Solomon. 

1 Ki 12:22 But the word of Yahweh came to Shemaiah, man of God, 

1 Ki 12:23 “Say this to Rehoboam son of Solomon, king of Judah, to the whole House of Judah, to Benjamin and 
to the rest of the people, 

1 Ki 1 2:24 ‘Yahweh says this: Do not go and make war on your brothers, the Israelites; let everyone go home, 
for this is my doing’”. They obeyed the command of Yahweh and turned back in accordance with his word. 

1 Ki 12:25 Jeroboam fortified Shechem in the mountain country of Ephraim and made that his residence. Then, 
leaving there, he fortified Penuel. 

1 Ki 12:26 Jeroboam thought to himself, “As things are, the kingdom will revert to the House of David. 

1 Ki 12:27 If this people continues to go up to the Temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem to offer sacrifices, the 
people’s heart will turn back again to their lord, Rehoboam king of Judah, and they will put me to death”. 

1 Ki 12:28 So the king thought this over and then made two golden calves; he said to the people, “You have 
been going up to Jerusalem long enough. Here is your God, Israel, who brought you out of Egypt!”. 

1 Ki 1 2:29 He set one up at Bethel, 

1 Ki 12:30 and the people went in procession in front of the other one all the way to Dan. In Israel this gave rise 
to sin, for the people went to Bethel to worship the one, and all the way to Dan to worship the other. 

1 Ki 12:31 He set up shrines on the high places and appointed priests from ordinary families, who were not of 
levitical descent. 

1 Ki 12:32 Jeroboam also instituted a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth of the month, like the feast kept 
in Judah, when he offered sacrifices on the altar. This he did at Bethel, offering sacrifices to the calves which he 
had made and, at Bethel, installing the priests of the high places which he had set up. 

1 Ki 12:33 On the fifteenth of the eighth month, the month which he had chosen deliberately, he offered 
sacrifices on the altar which he had made at Bethel; he instituted a feast for the Israelites and himself went up to 
the altar to burn the sacrifice. 

1 Ki 13:1 There came to Bethel at Yahweh’s command a man of God from Judah, just as Jeroboam was 
standing by the altar to offer the sacrifice, 

1 Ki 13:2 and at Yahweh’s command this man denounced the altar. “Altar, altar”, he said, “Yahweh says this, ‘A 
son is to be born to the House of David, Josiah by name, and on you he will slaughter the priests of the high 
places who have offered sacrifice on you, and on you he will burn human bones’”. 

1 Ki 13:3 At the same time he gave a sign. “This is the sign”, he said, “that Yahweh has spoken, ‘This altar will 
burst apart and the ashes which are on it will be spilt’”. 

1 Ki 13:4 When the king heard how the man of God denounced the altar of Bethel, he stretched out his hand 
from the altar, saying, “Seize him!”. But the hand he stretched out against the man withered, and he could not 
draw it back, 

1 Ki 13:5 and the altar burst apart and the ashes from the altar were spilt, in accordance with the sign given by 
the man of God at Yahweh’s command. 

1 Ki 13:6 The king said to the man of God, “I beg you to placate Yahweh your God, and so restore me the use of 
my hand”. The man of God placated Yahweh; the king’s hand was restored as it had been before. 

1 Ki 13:7 The king then said to the man of God, “Come home with me and refresh yourself, and I shall give you a 
present”, 

1 Ki 13:8 but the man of God replied to the king, “Were you to give me half your palace, I would not go with you. I 
will eat and drink nothing here, 

1 Ki 13:9 for I have had Yahweh’s order, ‘You are to eat or drink nothing, nor to return by the way you came’”. 

1 Ki 13:10 And he left by another road and did not return by the way he had come to Bethel. 

1 Ki 13:1 1 Now there was an old prophet living in Bethel, and his sons came to tell him all that the man of God 
had done in Bethel that day; and the words which he had said to the king, they told these to their father too. 

1 Ki 13:12 “Which road did he take?”. their father asked. His sons showed him the road which the man of God 
who came from Judah had taken. 

1 Ki 13:13 “Saddle the donkey for me”, he said to his sons; they saddled the donkey for him and he mounted. 

1 Ki 13:14 He followed the man of God and found him sitting under a terebinth. “Are you the man of God”, he 
said, “who came from Judah?”. “I am”, he replied. 

1 Ki 13:15 “Come home with me”, he said, “and take some food”. 

1 Ki 13:16 “I cannot go back with you”, he answered, “or eat or drink anything here, 

1 Ki 13:17 for I have received Yahweh’s order, ‘You are to eat or drink nothing there, nor to return by the way 
you came’”. 

1 Ki 13:18 “I too am a prophet like you”, the other replied, “and an angel told me this by Yahweh’s command, 
‘Bring him back with you to your house to eat and drink’”. He was lying to him. 

1 Ki 13:19 The man of God went back with him; he ate and drank at his house. 

1 Ki 13:20 As they were sitting at table a word of Yahweh came to the prophet who had brought him back, 



1 Ki 13:21 and he addressed the man of God who came from Judah. “Yahweh says this”, he said. “‘Since you 
have defied Yahweh’s command and not obeyed the orders which Yahweh your God gave you, 

1 Ki 13:22 but have come back and eaten and drunk where he forbade you to eat and drink, your corpse will 
never reach the tomb of your ancestors’”. 

1 Ki 13:23 After he had eaten and drunk, the prophet saddled the donkey for him, and he turned about and went 
away. 

1 Ki 13:24 A lion met him on the road and killed him; his corpse lay stretched out on the road; the donkey stood 
there beside it; the lion stood by the corpse too. 

1 Ki 13:25 People going by saw the corpse lying on the road and the lion standing by the corpse, and went and 
spoke about it in the town where the old prophet lived. 

1 Ki 13:26 When the prophet who had made the man turn back heard about it, he said, That is the man of God 
who defied Yahweh’s command! Yahweh has handed him over to the lion, which has mauled and killed him, just 
as Yahweh had foretold it would”. 

1 Ki 13:27 He said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me”, and they saddled it. 

1 Ki 13:28 He set off and found the man’s corpse lying on the road with the donkey and the lion standing beside 
the corpse; the lion had neither eaten the corpse nor mauled the donkey. 

1 Ki 1 3:29 The prophet lifted the corpse of the man of God and put it on the donkey and brought it back to the 
town where he lived to hold mourning for him and bury him. 

1 Ki 13:30 He laid the corpse in his own tomb, and they raised the mourning cry for him, “Alas, my brother!”. 

1 Ki 13:31 After burying him, the prophet said to his sons, “When I die, bury me in the same tomb as the man of 
God, lay my bones beside his. 

1 Ki 1 3:32 For the word he uttered at Yahweh’s command against the altar of Bethel and against all the shrines 
of the high places in the towns of Samaria will certainly come true”. 

1 Ki 1 3:33 Jeroboam did not give up his wicked ways after this incident, but went on appointing priests for the 
high places from the common people. He consecrated as priests of the high places any who wished to be. 

1 Ki 13:34 Such conduct made the House of Jeroboam a sinful House, and caused its ruin and extinction from 
the face of the earth. 

1 Ki 14:1 At that time Abijah, Jeroboam’s son, fell sick, 

1 Ki 14:2 and Jeroboam said to his wife, “Come, please disguise yourself so that no one will recognise you as 
Jeroboam’s wife, and go to Shiloh; the prophet Ahijah is there, the man who said I was to be king of this people. 

1 Ki 14:3 Go to him, and take ten loaves and some savoury food and a jar of honey; he will tell you what will 
happen to the child”. 

1 Ki 14:4 Jeroboam’s wife did this: she set out, went to Shiloh and came to Ahijah’s house. 

1 Ki 14:5 Now Ahijah could not see, his eyes were fixed with age, but Yahweh had told him, “Jeroboam’s wife is 
now on her way to ask you for a prophecy about her son, as he is sick. You will tell her such and such. When 
she comes, she will pretend to be some other woman”. 

1 Ki 14:6 So when Ahijah heard her footsteps at the door, he called, “Come in, wife of Jeroboam; why pretend to 
be someöne else? I have bad news for you. 

1 Ki 14:7 Go and tell Jeroboam, ‘Yahweh, God of Israel, says this: I raised you from the people and made you 
leader of my people Israel; 

1 Ki 14:8 I tore the kingdom from the House of David and gave it to you. But you have not been like my servant 
David who kept my commandments and followed me with all his heart, doing only what I regard as right; 

1 Ki 14:9 you have done more evil than all your predecessors, you have gone and made yourself other gods, 
idols of cast metal, provoking my anger, and you have turned your back on me. 

1 Ki 14:10 For this I shall bring disaster on the House of Jeroboam, I shall wipe out every manjack of the family 
of Jeroboam, fettered or free in Israel, I shall sweep away the House of Jeroboam as a man sweeps dung away 
till none is left. 

1 Ki 14:1 1 Those of Jeroboam’s family who die in the city, the dogs will eat; and those who die in the open 
country, the birds of the air will eat, for Yahweh has spoken’. 

1 Ki 14:12 Now get up and go home; at the moment your feet enter the town, the child will die. 

1 Ki 14:13 All Israel will mourn for him, and bury him; and he alone of Jeroboam’s family will have a proper 
burial, for in him alone of the House of Jeroboam can Yahweh, God of Israel, find anything good. 

1 Ki 14:14 Yahweh will set a king over Israel, who will put an end to the House of Jeroboam. 

1 Ki 14:15 Yahweh will make Israel shake, till it quivers like a reed in the water; he will uproot Israel from this 
prosperous land which he gave to their ancestors and scatter them beyond the River for provoking Yahweh to 
anger by making their sacred poles. 

1 Ki 14:16 He will abandon Israel for the sins which Jeroboam has committed and made Israel commit”. 

1 Ki 14:17 Jeroboam’s wife rose and left. She arrived at Tirzah, and when she crossed the threshold of the 
palace, the child was already dead. 



1 Ki 14:18 They buried him, and all Israel mourned for him, just as Yahweh had foretold through his servant 
Ahijah the prophet. 

1 Ki 14:19 The rest of the history of Jeroboam, what wars he waged, how he governed, this is recorded in the 
Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel. 

1 Ki 14:20 Jeroboam’s reign lasted twenty-two years. Then he fell asleep with his ancestors; his son Nadab 
succeeded him. 

1 Ki 14:21 In Judah, Rehoboam son of Solomon became king; he was forty-one years old when he came to the 
throne and he reigned for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Yahweh had chosen out of all the tribes 
of Israel, to give his name a home there. His mother’s name was Naamah, the Ammonite. 

1 Ki 14:22 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, arousing his resentment more than his ancestors by all the sins 
which they had committed; 

1 Ki 14:23 they had built themselves high places, and had set up pillars and sacred poles on every high hill and 
under every spreading tree. 

1 Ki 14:24 There were even male sacred prostitutes in the country. He copied all the shameful practices of the 
nations whom Yahweh had dispossessed for the Israelites. 

1 Ki 14:25 And so it happened that in the fifth year of King Rehoboam, Shishak king of Egypt advanced on 
Jerusalem 

1 Ki 14:26 and carried off all the treasures of the Temple of Yahweh and the treasures of the royal palace; he 
took everything away, including all the golden shields which Solomon had made. 

1 Ki 14:27 To replace those King Rehoboam made bronze shields, entrusting them to the commanders of the 
guard who guarded the king’s palace gate. 

1 Ki 14:28 Whenever the king went to the Temple of Yahweh, the guards would carry them, returning them to the 
guardroom afterwards. 

1 Ki 14:29 The rest of the history of Rehoboam, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals 
of the Kings of Judah? 

1 Ki 14:30 Warfare between Rehoboam and Jeroboam went on throughout the period. 

1 Ki 14:31 When Rehoboam fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in the City of David; his son Abijam 
succeeded him. 

1 Ki 15:1 In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam son of Nebat, Abijam became king of Judah 
1 Ki 15:2 and reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah descendant of Absalom. 

1 Ki 15:3 In everything he followed the sinful example of his father before him; his heart was not wholly with 
Yahweh his God, as the heart of David his ancestor had been. 

1 Ki 15:4 However, for David’s sake, Yahweh his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, with a son to succeed him, 
so keeping Jerusalem secure; 

1 Ki 15:5 for David had done what Yahweh regarded as right and had never in all his life disobeyed whatever he 
commanded him (except in the matter of Uriah the Hittite). 

1 Ki 15:6 

1 Ki 15:7 The rest of the history of Abijam, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Judah? Abijam and Jeroboam made war on each other. 

1 Ki 15:8 When Abijam fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in the City of David; his son Asa succeeded 
him. 

1 Ki 15:9 In the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Asa became king of Judah 

1 Ki 15:10 and reigned for forty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maacah descendant of 

Absalom. 

1 Ki 15:11 Asa did what Yahweh regards as right, as his ancestor David had done. 

1 Ki 15:12 He drove the male prostitutes out of the country and got rid of all the idols which his ancestors had 
made. 

1 Ki 15:13 He even deprived his grandmother Maacah of the dignity of Great Lady for having made an obscenity 
for Asherah; Asa cut down her obscenity and burnt it in the ravine of the Kidron. 

1 Ki 15:14 Though the high places were not abolished, Asa’s heart was loyal to Yahweh throughout his life. 

1 Ki 15:15 He deposited his father’s and his own dedicated gifts of silver, gold and sacred vessels in the Temple 
of Yahweh. 

1 Ki 15:16 Asa and Baasha king of Israel were at war with each other throughout their reigns. 

1 Ki 15:17 Baasha king of Israel marched on Judah and fortified Ramah to blockade Asa king of Judah. 

1 Ki 15:18 Asa then took all the remaining silver and gold left in the treasuries of the Temple of Yahweh and the 
royal palace. Entrusting this to his servants, King Asa sent them with the following message to Ben-Hadad son 
of Tabrimmon, son of Hezion, the king of Aram who lived in Damascus, 

1 Ki 15:19 “Let us make an alliance between myself and yourself, between my father and your father! Look, I 
have sent you a gift of silver and gold. Come, break off your alliance with Baasha king of Israel, which will make 



him withdraw from me”. 

1 Ki 15:20 Ben-Hadad listened favourably to King Asa, and sent the generals of his armies to attack the towns of 
Israel; he ravaged Ijon, Dan, Abel-Beth-Maacah, all Chinneroth, and the whole territory of Naphtali. 

1 Ki 15:21 When Baasha heard this he gave up fortifying Ramah and retired to Tirzah. 

1 Ki 15:22 King Asa then summoned all Judah, no one was exempt; they took away the stones and timber with 
which Baasha had been fortifying Ramah, and King Asa used them to fortify Geba of Benjamin and Mizpah. 

1 Ki 15:23 The rest of the history of Asa, all his valour, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the 
Annals of the Kings of Judah? In his old age, however, he contracted a disease of his feet. 

1 Ki 15:24 When Asa fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried with his ancestors in the City of his ancestor 
David; his son Jehoshaphat succeeded him. 

1 Ki 15:25 Nadab son of Jeroboam became king of Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and he 
reigned over Israel for two years. 

1 Ki 15:26 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh; he copied his father’s example and the sin into which he had 
led Israel. 

1 Ki 15:27 Baasha son of Ahijah, of the House of Issachar, plotted against him and murdered him at Gibbethon, 
a Philistine town which Nadab and all Israel were besieging. 

1 Ki 15:28 Baasha killed Nadab and succeeded him in the third year of Asa king of Judah. 

1 Ki 15:29 No sooner was he king than he butchered the entire House of Jeroboam, not sparing a soul, and put 
an end to it, just as Yahweh had foretold through his servant Ahijah of Shiloh, 

1 Ki 15:30 because of the sins which he had committed and into which he had led Israel, and because he had 
provoked the anger of Yahweh, God of Israel. 

1 Ki 15:31 The rest of the history of Nadab, his entire career, is this not recorded in 
1 Ki 1 5:32 the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 

1 Ki 15:33 In the third year of Asa king of Judah, Baasha son of Ahijah became king of Israel at Tirzah for 
twenty-four years. 

1 Ki 15:34 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh; he copied the example of Jeroboam and the sin into which he 
had led Israel. 

1 Ki 16:1 The word of Yahweh came to Jehu son of Hanani against Baasha: 

1 Ki 16:2 “I raised you from the dust and made you leader of my people Israel, but you have followed Jeroboam’s 
example and led my people Israel into sins which provoke my anger. 

1 Ki 16:3 Now I shall sweep away Baasha and his House; I shall make your House like the House of Jeroboam 
son of Nebat. 

1 Ki 16:4 Those of Baasha’s family who die in the city, the dogs will eat; and those who die in the open country, 
the birds of the air will eat”. 

1 Ki 16:5 The rest of the history of Baasha, his career, his valour, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals 
of the Kings of Israel? 

1 Ki 16:6 When Baasha fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in Tirzah; his son Elah succeeded him. 

1 Ki 16:7 Furthermore, the word of Yahweh was delivered through the prophet Jehu son of Hanani against 
Baasha and his House, first because of the many ways in which he had displeased Yahweh, provoking him to 
anger by his actions and becoming like the House of Jeroboam; secondly because he had destroyed that House. 
1 Ki 16:8 In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of Judah, Elah son of Baasha became king of Israel at Tirzah, for 
two years. 

1 Ki 16:9 Zimri, one of his officers, captain of half his chariotry, plotted against him. While he was at Tirzah, 
drinking himself senseless in the house of Arza who was master of the palace in Tirzah, 

1 Ki 16:10 Zimri came in, struck him down and killed him in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and 
succeeded him. 

1 Ki 16:1 1 On his accession, as soon as he was seated on the throne, he butchered Baasha’s entire family, not 
leaving him one manjack of them alive, neither relative nor friend. 

1 Ki 16:12 Zimri destroyed the whole House of Baasha, in accordance with the word which Yahweh had spoken 
against Baasha through the prophet Jehu, 

1 Ki 16:13 because of all the sins of Baasha and his son Elah into which they had led Israel, provoking the anger 
of Yahweh, God of Israel, with their worthless idols. 

1 Ki 16:14 The history of Elah, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of 
Israel? 

1 Ki 16:15 In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, Zimri became king for seven days, at Tirzah. The 
people were then encamped in front of Gibbethon, a Philistine town. 

1 Ki 16:16 When news reached the camp of how Zimri had not only plotted against but actually killed the king, all 
Israel proclaimed the army commander Omri as king of Israel in the camp that very day. 

1 Ki 16:17 Omri, and all Israel with him, raised the siege of Gibbethon and laid siege to Tirzah. 



1 Ki 16:18 When Zimri saw that the town had been captured, he went into the keep of the royal palace, burned 
the palace over his own head, and died. 

1 Ki 16:19 This was because of the sin which he had committed in doing what is displeasing to Yahweh, by 
copying the example of Jeroboam and the sin into which he had led Israel. 

1 Ki 1 6:20 The rest of the history of Zimri and of his conspiracy, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of 
the Kings of Israel? 

1 Ki 16:21 The people of Israel then split into two factions: one half following Tibni son of Ginath to make him 
king, the other half following Omri. 

1 Ki 16:22 But the faction of Omri proved stronger than that of Tibni son of Ginath; thus Tibni lost his life and 
Omri became king. 

1 Ki 16:23 In the thirty-first year of Asa king of Judah, Omri became king of Israel and reigned for twelve years. 
He reigned for six years at Tirzah. 

1 Ki 1 6:24 Then for two talents of silver he bought the hill of Samaria from Shemer and on it built a town which 
he named Samaria after Shemer who had owned the hill. 

1 Ki 16:25 Omri did what is displeasing to Yahweh, and was worse than all his predecessors. 

1 Ki 16:26 In every way he copied the example of Jeroboam son of Nebat and the sins into which he had led 
Israel, provoking the anger of Yahweh, God of Israel, with their worthless idols. 

1 Ki 1 6:27 The rest of the history of Omri, his career, his valour, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of 
the Kings of Israel? 

1 Ki 16:28 When Omri fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in Samaria; his son Ahab succeeded him. 

1 Ki 16:29 Ahab son of Omri became king of Israel in the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned 
over Israel for twenty-two years in Samaria. 

1 Ki 16:30 Ahab son of Omri did what is displeasing to Yahweh, and was worse than all his predecessors. 

1 Ki 16:31 The least that he did was to follow the sinful example of Jeroboam son of Nebat: he married Jezebel 
daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Sidonians, and then proceeded to serve Baal and worship him. 

1 Ki 16:32 He erected an altar to him in the temple of Baal which he built in Samaria. 

1 Ki 16:33 Ahab also put up a sacred pole and committed other crimes as well, provoking the anger of Yahweh, 
God of Israel, more than all the kings of Israel his predecessors. 

1 Ki 16:34 It was in his time that Hiel of Bethel rebuilt Jericho. Laying its foundations cost him his eldest son 
Abiram and erecting its gates cost him his youngest son Segub, just as Yahweh had foretold through Joshua son 
of Nun. 

1 Ki 17:1 Elijah the Tishbite, of Tishbe in Gilead, said to Ahab, “By the life of Yahweh, God of Israel, whom I 
serve, there will be neither dew nor rain these coming years unless I give the word”. 

1 Ki 17:2 The word of Yahweh came to him, 

1 Ki 17:3 “Go away from here, go east and hide by the torrent of Cherith, east of the Jordan. 

1 Ki 17:4 You can drink from the stream, and I have ordered the ravens to bring you food there”. 

1 Ki 17:5 So he set out and did as Yahweh had said; he went and stayed by the torrent of Cherith, east of the 
Jordan. 

1 Ki 17:6 The ravens brought him bread in the morning and meat in the evening, and he quenched his thirst at 
the stream. 

1 Ki 17:7 But after a while the stream dried up, for the country had had no rain. 

1 Ki 17:8 And then the word of Yahweh came to him, 

1 Ki 17:9 “Up and go to Zarephath in Sidonia, and stay there. I have ordered a widow there to give you food”. 

1 Ki 17:10 So he went off to Sidon. And when he reached the city gate, there was a widow gathering sticks. 
Addressing her he said, “Please bring a little water in a pitcher for me to drink”. 

1 Ki 17:1 1 She was on her way to fetch it when he called after her. “Please”, he said, “bring me a scrap of bread 
in your hand”. 

1 Ki 17:12 “As Yahweh your God lives”, she replied, “I have no baked bread, but only a handful of meal in a jar 
and a little oil in a jug; I am just gathering a stick or two to go and prepare this for myself and my son to eat, and 
then we shall die”. 

1 Ki 17:13 But Elijah said to her, “Do not be afraid, go and do as you have said; but first make a little scone of it 
for me and bring it to me, and then make some for yourself and for your son. 

1 Ki 17:14 For Yahweh, God of Israel, says this: Jar of meal shall not be spent, jug of oil shall not be emptied, 
before the day when Yahweh sends rain on the face of the earth”. 

1 Ki 17:15 The woman went and did as Elijah told her and they ate the food, she, himself and her son. 

1 Ki 17:16 The jar of meal was not spent nor the jug of oil emptied, just as Yahweh had foretold through Elijah. 

1 Ki 17:17 It happened after this that the son of the mistress of the house fell sick; his illness was so severe that 
in the end he expired. 

1 Ki 17:18 And the woman said to Elijah, “What quarrel have you with me, man of God? Have you come here to 



bring my sins home to me and to kill my son?”. 

1 Ki 17:19 “Give me your son”, he said and, taking him from her lap, he carried him to the upper room where he 
was staying and laid him on his bed. 

1 Ki 17:20 He cried out to Yahweh, “Yahweh my God, by killing her son do you mean to bring grief even to the 
widow who is looking after me?”. 

1 Ki 17:21 He stretched himself on the child three times and cried out to Yahweh, “Yahweh my God, may the 
soul of this child, I beg you, come into him again!”. 

1 Ki 17:22 Yahweh heard Elijah’s prayer and the child’s soul came back into his body and he revived. 

1 Ki 17:23 Elijah took the child, brought him down from the upper room into the house, and gave him to his 
mother. “Look”, Elijah said, “your son is alive”. 

1 Ki 17:24 And the woman replied, “Now I know you are a man of God and the word of Yahweh in your mouth is 
truth itself”. 

1 Ki 18:1 A long time went by, and the word of Yahweh came to Elijah in the third year, “Go, present yourself to 
Ahab, and I will send rain on the country”. 

1 Ki 18:2 So Elijah set off to present himself to Ahab. As the famine was particularly severe in Samaria, 

1 Ki 18:3 Ahab summoned Obadiah, the master of the palace — Obadiah held Yahweh in great reverence: 

1 Ki 18:4 when Jezebel was butchering the prophets of Yahweh, Obadiah took a hundred of them and hid them, 
fifty at a time, in a cave, and kept them provided with food and water- 

1 Ki 18:5 and Ahab said to Obadiah, “Come along, we must scour the country, all the springs and all the ravines 
in the hope of finding grass to keep horses and mules alive, or we shall have to slaughter some of our stock”. 

1 Ki 18:6 They divided the country for the purpose of their survey; Ahab went one way by himself and Obadiah 
went another way by himself. 

1 Ki 18:7 While Obadiah was on his way, whom should he meet but Elijah. Recognising him he fell on his face 
and said, “So it is you, my lord Elijah!”. 

1 Ki 18:8 “Yes”, he replied, “go and tell your master, ‘Elijah is here’”. 

1 Ki 18:9 But Obadiah said, “What sin I have committed, for you to put your servant into Ahab’s power and cause 
my death? 

1 Ki 18:10 As Yahweh your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my master has not sent in search of 
you; and when they said, ‘He is not there’, he made the kingdom or nation swear an oath that they did not know 
where you were. 

1 Ki 18:1 1 And now you say to me, ‘Go and tell your master: Elijah is here’. 

1 Ki 18:12 But as soon as I leave you, the spirit of Yahweh will carry you away and I shall not know where; I shall 
go and tell Ahab; he will not be able to find you, and then he will kill me. Yet from his youth your servant has 
revered Yahweh. 

1 Ki 18:13 Has no one told my lord what I did when Jezebel butchered the prophets of Yahweh, how I hid a 
hundred of them in a cave, fifty at a time, and kept them provided with food and water? 

1 Ki 18:14 And now you say to me, ‘Go and tell your master: Elijah is here’. Why, he will kill me!”. 

1 Ki 18:15 Elijah replied, “As Yahweh Sabaoth lives, whom I serve, I shall present myself to him today!”. 

1 Ki 18:16 Obadiah went to find Ahab and tell him the news, and Ahab then went to find Elijah. 

1 Ki 18:17 When he saw Elijah, Ahab said, “So there you are, you scourge of Israel!”. 

1 Ki 18:18 “Not I”, he replied, “I am not the scourge of Israel, you and your family are; because you have deserted 
Yahweh and followed Baal. 

1 Ki 18:19 Now give orders for all Israel to gather round me on Mount Carmel, and also the four hundred 
prophets of Baal who eat at Jezebel’s table”. 

1 Ki 1 8:20 Ahab called all Israel together and assembled the prophets on Mount Carmel. 

1 Ki 18:21 Elijah stepped out in front of all the people. “How long”, he said, “do you mean to hobble first on one 
leg then on the other? If Yahweh is God, follow him; if Baal, follow him”. But the people had nothing to say. 

1 Ki 18:22 Elijah then said to them, “I, I alone, am left as a prophet of Yahweh, while the prophets of Baal are 
four hundred and fifty. 

1 Ki 1 8:23 Let two bulls be given us; let them choose one for themselves, dismember it but not set fire to it. I in 
my turn shall prepare the other bull, but not set fire to it. 

1 Ki 18:24 You must call on the name of your god, and I shall call on the name of Yahweh; the god who answers 
with fire, is God indeed”. The people all answered, “Agreed!”. 

1 Ki 18:25 Elijah then said to the prophets of Baal, “Choose one bull and begin, for there are more of you. Call on 
the name of your god but light no fire”. 

1 Ki 18:26 They took the bull and prepared it, and from morning to midday they called on the name of Baal. “O 
Baal, answer us!”. they cried, but there was no voice, no answer, as they performed their hobbling dance round 
the altar which they had made. 

1 Ki 18:27 Midday came, and Elijah mocked them. “Call louder”, he said, “for he is a god: he is preoccupied or he 



is busy, or he has gone on a journey; perhaps he is asleep and needs to be woken up!”. 

1 Ki 18:28 So they shouted louder and gashed themselves, as their custom was, with swords and spears until 
the blood flowed down them. 

1 Ki 18:29 Midday passed, and they ranted on until the time when the offering is presented; but there was no 
voice, no answer, no sign of attention. 

1 Ki 18:30 Then Elijah said to all the people, “Come over to me”, and all the people came over to him. He 
repaired Yahweh’s altar which had been torn down. 

1 Ki 18:31 Elijah took twelve stones, corresponding to the number of tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the 
word of Yahweh had come, “Israel is to be your name”, 

1 Ki 18:32 and built an altar in the name of Yahweh. Round the altar he dug a trench of a size to hold two 
measures of seed. 

1 Ki 18:33 He then arranged the wood, dismembered the bull, and laid it on the wood. 

1 Ki 18:34 Then he said, “Fill four jars with water and pour it on the burnt offering and on the wood”. They did this. 
He said, “Do it a second time;” they did it a second time. He said, “Do it a third time;” they did it a third time. 

1 Ki 1 8:35 The water flowed round the altar until even the trench itself was full of water. 

1 Ki 18:36 At the time when the offering is presented, Elijah the prophet stepped forward. “Yahweh, God of 
Abraham, Isaac and Israel”, he said, “let them know today that you are God in Israel, and that I am your servant, 
that I have done all these things at your command. 

1 Ki 18:37 Answer me, Yahweh, answer me, so that this people may know that you, Yahweh, are God and are 
winning back their hearts”. 

1 Ki 18:38 Then Yahweh’s fire fell and consumed the burnt offering and the wood and licked up the water in the 
trench. 

1 Ki 18:39 When all the people saw this they fell on their faces. “Yahweh is God”, they cried, “Yahweh is God!”. 

1 Ki 18:40 Elijah said, “Seize the prophets of Baal: do not let one of them escape”. They seized them, and Elijah 
took them down to the Kishon, and there he slaughtered them. 

1 Ki 18:41 Elijah said to Ahab, “Go back now, eat and drink; for I hear the approaching sound of rain”. 

1 Ki 18:42 While Ahab went back to eat and drink, Elijah climbed to the top of Carmel and bowed down to the 
ground, putting his face between his knees. 

1 Ki 18:43 “Now go up”, he told his servant, “and look out to sea”. He went up and looked. “There is nothing at all”, 
he said. Seven times Elijah told him to go back. 

1 Ki 18:44 The seventh time, the servant said, “Now there is a cloud, small as a man’s hand, rising from the sea”. 
Elijah said, “Go and say to Ahab, ‘Harness the chariot and go down before the rain stops you’”. 

1 Ki 18:45 And with that the sky grew dark with cloud and storm, and rain fell in torrents. Ahab mounted his 
chariot and made for Jezreel. 

1 Ki 18:46 But the hand of Yahweh had come on Elijah and, hitching up his clothes, he ran ahead of Ahab all the 
way to Jezreel. 

1 Ki 19:1 When Ahab told Jezebel everything that Elijah had done, and how he had put all the prophets to the 
sword, 

1 Ki 19:2 Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah to say, “May the gods bring unnameable ills on me and worse ills 
too, if by this time tomorrow I have not made your life like one of theirs!”. 

1 Ki 19:3 He was afraid and fled for his life. He came to Beersheba, a town of Judah, where he left his servant. 

1 Ki 19:4 He himself went on into the desert, a day’s journey, and sitting under a furze bush wished he were 
dead. “Yahweh”, he said, “I have had enough. Take my life; I am no better than my ancestors”. 

1 Ki 19:5 Then he lay down and went to sleep. Then all of a sudden an angel touched him and said, “Get up and 
eat”. 

1 Ki 19:6 He looked round, and there at his head was a scone baked on hot stones, and a jar of water. He ate 
and drank and then lay down again. 

1 Ki 19:7 But the angel of Yahweh came back a second time and touched him and said, “Get up and eat, or the 
journey will be too long for you”. 

1 Ki 19:8 So he got up and ate and drank, and strengthened by that food he walked for forty days and forty 
nights until he reached Horeb, God’s mountain. 

1 Ki 19:9 There he went into a cave and spent the night there. Then the word of Yahweh came to him saying, 
“What are you doing here, Elijah?”. 

1 Ki 19:10 He replied, “I am full of jealous zeal for Yahweh Sabaoth, because the Israelites have abandoned your 
covenant, have torn down your altars and put your prophets to the sword. I am the only one left, and now they 
want to kill me”. 

1 Ki 19:1 1 Then he was told, “Go out and stand on the mountain before Yahweh”. For at that moment Yahweh 
was going by. A mighty hurricane split the mountains and shattered the rocks before Yahweh. But Yahweh was 
not in the hurricane. And after the hurricane, an earthquake. But Yahweh was not in the earthquake. 



1 Ki 19:12 And after the earthquake, fire. But Yahweh was not in the fire. And after the fire, a light murmuring 
sound. 

1 Ki 19:13 And when Elijah heard this, he covered his face with his cloak and went out and stood at the entrance 
of the cave. Then a voice came to him, which said, “What are you doing here, Elijah?”. 

1 Ki 19:14 He replied, “I am full of jealous zeal for Yahweh, God Sabaoth, because the Israelites have 
abandoned your covenant, have torn down your altars and put your prophets to the sword. I am the only one left 
and now they want to kill me”. 

1 Ki 19:15 “Go”, Yahweh said, “go back by the same way to the desert of Damascus. You must go and anoint 
Hazael as king of Aram. 

1 Ki 19:16 You must anoint Jehu son of Nimshi as king of Israel, and anoint Elisha son of Shaphat, of Abel- 
Meholah, as prophet to succeed you. 

1 Ki 19:17 Anyone who escapes the sword of Hazael will be put to death by Jehu; and anyone who escapes the 
sword of Jehu will be put to death by Elisha. 

1 Ki 19:18 But I shall spare seven thousand in Israel; all the knees that have not bent before Baal, all the mouths 
that have not kissed him”. 

1 Ki 19:19 Leaving there, he came on Elisha son of Shaphat as he was ploughing behind twelve yoke of oxen, 
he himself being with the twelfth. Elijah passed near to him and threw his cloak over him. 

1 Ki 19:20 Elisha left his oxen and ran after Elijah. “Let me kiss my father and mother, then I will follow you”, he 
said. Elijah answered, “Go, go back; for have I done anything to you?”. 

1 Ki 19:21 Elisha turned away, took a yoke of oxen and slaughtered them. He used the oxen’s tackle for cooking 
the meat, which he gave the people to eat. He then rose and, following Elijah, became his servant. 

1 Ki 20:1 Ben-Hadad king of Aram mustered his whole army — thirty-two kings were with him, and horses and 
chariots — and marched on Samaria, to besiege it and take it by assault. 

1 Ki 20:2 He sent messengers into the city to Ahab king of Israel to tell him, “Ben-Hadad says this, 

1 Ki 20:3 ‘Your silver and gold are mine. Your wives and children remain yours’”. 

1 Ki 20:4 The king of Israel replied, “As you command, my lord king. Myself and all I have are yours”. 

1 Ki 20:5 The messengers came again, this time they said, “Ben-Hadad says this, ‘I have already sent you an 
order to hand over your silver and your gold, your wives and your children; 

1 Ki 20:6 but I swear, this time tomorrow, I shall send my servants to ransack your house and your servants’ 
houses and lay hands on everything that they value and take it away’”. 

1 Ki 20:7 The king of Israel summoned all the elders of the country and said, “You can see clearly how this man 
intends to ruin us. He has already demanded my wives and my children, although I have not refused him my 
silver and gold”. 

1 Ki 20:8 All the elders and all the people said, “Take no notice. Do not consent”. 

1 Ki 20:9 So he gave this answer to Ben-Hadad’s messengers, “Say to my lord the king, ‘All you first required of 

your servant I will do, but this I cannot do’”. And the messengers went back with the answer. 

1 Ki 20:10 Ben-Hadad then sent him the following message, “May the gods bring unnameable ills on me and 
worse ills too, if there is enough dust in Samaria for each of my followers to have a handful!”. 

1 Ki 20:1 1 But the king of Israel returned this answer, “Say: the man who puts on his armour is not the one to 

boast, but the man who takes it off”. 

1 Ki 20:12 When Ben-Hadad heard this message — he was under the awnings drinking with the kings — he gave 
orders to his servants, “Take up position!”. And they took up their positions against the city. 

1 Ki 20:13 A prophet then arrived, looking for Ahab king of Israel. “Yahweh says this”, he said. “‘You have seen 
this huge army? This very day I shall deliver it into your hands, and you will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

1 Ki 20:14 “By whose means?”. Ahab asked. The prophet replied, “Yahweh says this, ‘By means of the guards of 
the district governors’”. “Who will co-ordinate the attack?”. Ahab asked. “You will”, the prophet replied. 

1 Ki 20:15 So Ahab inspected the guards of the district governors: there were two hundred and thirty-two. After 
these he reviewed the army, all the Israelites: there were seven thousand. 

1 Ki 20:16 They made a sortie at midday, when Ben-Hadad was drinking himself senseless under the awnings, 
he and the thirty-two kings who were allies. 

1 Ki 20:1 7 The guards of the district governors led the sortie. A report was made to Ben-Hadad: “Some men 
have come out of Samaria”. 

1 Ki 20:18 He said, “If they have come out for peace, take them alive; if they have come out for war, take them 
alive too”. 

1 Ki 20:19 So they made a sortie from the city, the district governors’ guards and behind them the army, 

1 Ki 20:20 and each struck down his man. Aram took to flight and Israel pursued; Ben-Hadad king of Aram 
escaped on horseback. 

1 Ki 20:21 The king of Israel then advanced, capturing horses and chariots and inflicting a great defeat on Aram. 

1 Ki 20:22 The prophet then went to the king of Israel and said, “Now is the time to be resolute and think carefully 



about what you should do, for at the turn of the year the king of Aram will march against you”. 

1 Ki 20:23 The servants of the king of Aram said to him, “Their gods are gods of the mountains; that is why they 
have proved stronger than we are. But if we fight them on level ground, we shall certainly beat them. 

1 Ki 20:24 This is what you must do: remove all these kings from their commands and appoint professional 
soldiers in their place. 

1 Ki 20:25 You, for your part, must recruit an army as large as the one which deserted you, with as many horses 
and as many chariots; then if we fight them on level ground, we shall certainly beat them”. He listened to their 
advice and acted accordingly. 

1 Ki 20:26 At the turn of the year, Ben-Hadad mustered the Aramaeans and marched on Aphek to fight Israel. 

1 Ki 20:27 The Israelites were already mobilised and provisioned, and marched out to meet them. Encamped 
opposite them, the Israelites looked like two herds of goats, whereäs the Aramaeans filled the countryside. 

1 Ki 20:28 The man of God then went to the king of Israel and said, “Yahweh says this, ‘Since Aram has said 
that Yahweh is a god of the mountains and not a god of the plains, I shall put the whole of this huge army into 
your power, and you will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

1 Ki 20:29 For seven days they were encamped opposite each other. On the seventh day battle was joined and 
the Israelites slaughtered the Aramaeans, a hundred thousand foot soldiers in one day. 

1 Ki 20:30 The rest fled to Aphek, into the citadel, but the city walls collapsed on twenty-seven thousand of the 
survivors. Now Ben-Hadad had fled and taken refuge in an inner room inside the citadel. 

1 Ki 20:31 “Look”, his servants said to him, “we have heard that the kings of Israel are faithful and kind kings. Let 
us put sackcloth round our waists and cords round our heads and go out to the king of Israel; perhaps he will 
spare your life”. 

1 Ki 20:32 So they wrapped sackcloth round their waists and put cords round their heads and went to the king of 
Israel, and said, “Your servant Ben-Hadad says, ‘Spare my life’”. 

1 Ki 20:33 “So he is still alive?”. he replied. “He is my brother”. The men took this for a good omen and quickly 
seized on his words. “Yes”, they said, “Ben-Hadad is your brother”. Ahab said, “Go and fetch him”. Then Ben- 
Hadad came out to him and Ahab made him get up into his chariot. 

1 Ki 20:34 Ben-Hadad said, “I shall restore the towns which my father took from your father and you may set up 
a trading quarter for yourself in Damascus as my father did in Samaria”. “With a treaty”, Ahab said, “I shall set you 
free”. Granting him a treaty, Ahab let him go. 

1 Ki 20:35 At Yahweh’s command a member of the brotherhood of prophets said to a companion of his, “Strike 
me”, but the man refused to strike him. 

1 Ki 20:36 So he said to him, “Since you have disobeyed Yahweh’s order, the very moment you leave me a lion 
will kill you”. And no sooner had he left him than he met a lion, which killed him. 

1 Ki 20:37 The prophet then went to find another man and said, “Strike me”, and the man struck him and 
wounded him. 

1 Ki 20:38 The prophet then went and stood waiting for the king on the road, disguising himself with a bandage 
over his eyes. 

1 Ki 20:39 As the king passed, he called out to him, “Your servant was making his way to where the fight was 
thickest when someöne left the fighting to bring a man to me, and said, ‘Guard this man; if he is found missing, 
your life will pay for his, or else you will have to pay one talent of silver’. 

1 Ki 20:40 But your servant was busy with one thing and another, the man disappeared”. The king of Israel said, 
“That is your sentence then. You have pronounced it yourself”. 

1 Ki 20:41 At this the man quickly pulled off the bandage over his eyes, and the king of Israel recognised him as 
one of the prophets. 

1 Ki 20:42 He said to the king, “Yahweh says this, ‘Since you have let the man escape who was under my curse 
of destruction, your life will pay for his, your people for his people’”. 

1 Ki 20:43 And the king of Israel went home, gloomy and out of temper, back to Samaria. 

1 Ki 21 :1 This is what happened next: Naboth of Jezreel had a vineyard close by the palace of Ahab king of 
Samaria, 

1 Ki 21 :2 and Ahab said to Naboth, “Give me your vineyard to be my vegetable garden, since it adjoins my 
palace; I will give you a better vineyard for it or, if you prefer, I will give you its value in money”. 

1 Ki 21 :3 Naboth, however, said to Ahab, “Yahweh forbid that I should give you my ancestral heritage!”. 

1 Ki 21 :4 Ahab went home gloomy and out of temper at the words of Naboth of Jezreel, “I will not give you my 
heritage from my ancestors”. He lay down on his bed and turned his face away and refused to eat. 

1 Ki 21 :5 His wife Jezebel came to him. “Why are you so dispirited”, she said, “that you refuse to eat?”. 

1 Ki 21 :6 He said, “I have been talking to Naboth of Jezreel. I said, ‘Give me your vineyard either for money or, if 
you prefer, for another vineyard in exchange’. But he said, ‘I will not give you my vineyard’”. 

1 Ki 21 :7 Then his wife Jezebel said, “Some king of Israel you make! Get up, eat and take heart; I myself shall 
get you the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite”. 



1 Ki 21 :8 So she wrote a letter in Ahab’s name and sealed it with his seal, sending the letter to the elders and 
notables of the city where Naboth lived. 

1 Ki 21:9 In the letter, she wrote, “Proclaim a fast, and put Naboth in a prominent place among the people. 

1 Ki 21:10 There confront him with a couple of scoundrels who will accuse him as follows, ‘You have cursed 
God and the king’. Then take him outside and stone him to death”. 

1 Ki 21 :1 1 The men of Naboth’s city, the elders and notables living in his city, did what Jezebel ordered, as was 
written in the letter which she had sent him. 

1 Ki 21:12 They proclaimed a fast and put Naboth in a prominent place among the people. 

1 Ki 21:13 The two scoundrels then came and confronted him, and the scoundrels then publicly accused Naboth 
as follows, “Naboth has cursed God and the king”. He was then taken outside the city and stoned to death. 

1 Ki 21:14 They then sent word to Jezebel, “Naboth has been stoned to death”. 

1 Ki 21:15 When Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned to death, she said to Ahab, “Get up! Take 
possession of the vineyard which Naboth of Jezreel refused to sell you, for Naboth is no longer alive, he is dead”. 
1 Ki 21:16 When Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, he got up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth of Jezreel 
and take possession of it. 

1 Ki 21:17 Then the word of Yahweh came to Elijah the Tishbite, 

1 Ki 21:18 “Up! Go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, in Samaria. You will find him in Naboth’s vineyard; he has 
gone down to take possession of it. 

1 Ki 21:19 You are to say this to him, ‘Yahweh says this: You have committed murder and now you usurp as 
well. For this — and Yahweh says this — in the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, the dogs will lick 
your blood too’”. 

1 Ki 21 :20 Ahab said to Elijah, “So you have caught me, O my enemy!”. Elijah answered, “I have caught you! For 
your double dealing, and since you have done what is displeasing to Yahweh, 

1 Ki 21 :21 I shall now bring disaster down on you; I shall sweep away your descendants and wipe out every 
manjack of the House of Ahab, fettered or free in Israel. 

1 Ki 21 :22 I shall treat your House as I treated the house of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah, 
for provoking my anger and leading Israel into sin. 

1 Ki 21 :23 (Against Jezebel too Yahweh spoke these words, ‘The dogs will eat Jezebel in the Field of Jezreel’.) 

1 Ki 21 :24 Those of Ahab’s family who die in the city, the dogs will eat; and those who die in the open country, 
the birds of the air will eat”. 

1 Ki 21 :25 And indeed there never was anyone like Ahab for double dealing and for doing what is displeasing to 
Yahweh, urged on by Jezebel his wife. 

1 Ki 21 :26 He behaved in the most abominable way, adhering to idols, just as the Amorites had, whom Yahweh 
had dispossessed for the Israelites. 

1 Ki 21 :27 When Ahab heard these words, he tore his garments and put sackcloth next to his skin and fasted; he 
slept in the sackcloth; he walked with slow steps. 

1 Ki 21 :28 Then the word of Yahweh came to Elijah the Tishbite, 

1 Ki 21 :29 “Have you seen how Ahab has humbled himself before me? Since he has humbled himself before me, 
I shall not bring the disaster in his days; I shall bring the disaster down on his House in his son’s days”. 

1 Ki 22:1 There was a lull of three years, with no fighting between Aram and Israel. 

1 Ki 22:2 Then, in the third year, Jehoshaphat king of Judah paid a visit to the king of Israel. 

1 Ki 22:3 The king of Israel said to his officers, “You are aware that Ramoth in Gilead belongs to us? And yet we 
do nothing to wrest it away from the king of Aram”. 

1 Ki 22:4 He said to Jehoshaphat, “Will you come with me to attack Ramoth in Gilead?”. Jehoshaphat replied to 
the king of Israel, “I will be as you, my men as yours, my horses as yours”. 

1 Ki 22:5 Jehoshaphat, however, said to the king of Israel, “First, please enquire what the word of Yahweh is”. 

1 Ki 22:6 The king of Israel then called the prophets together, about four hundred of them. “Should I go and 
attack Ramoth in Gilead”, he asked, “or should I hold back?”. “Go ahead”, they replied, “for Yahweh has already 
given it to the king”. 

1 Ki 22:7 Jehoshaphat, however, said, “Is there no other prophet of Yahweh here, so that we can enquire 
through him?”. 

1 Ki 22:8 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “There is one more man through whom we can consult 
Yahweh, but I hate him because he never has a favourable prophecy for me, only unfavourable ones; he is 
Micaiah son of Imlah”. “I hope the king’s words are unjustified”, said Jehoshaphat. 

1 Ki 22:9 The king of Israel then summoned a court official and said, “Bring Micaiah son of Imlah immediately”. 

1 Ki 22:10 The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, wearing their robes, 
in an open space just outside the gate of Samaria, with all the prophets in a state of ecstasy before them. 

1 Ki 22:1 1 Zedekiah son of Kenaanah, who had made himself some iron horns, said, “Yahweh says, ‘With horns 
like these you will gore the Aramaeans till you make an end of them’”. 



1 Ki 22:12 And all the prophets cried ecstatically in the same vein, saying, “March on Ramoth in Gilead! Success 
is sure, for Yahweh has already given it to the king!”. 

1 Ki 22:13 The messenger who had gone to summon Micaiah said to him, “Look here, what the prophets are 
saying is uniformly favourable to the king. I hope you will say the same as they do and speak favourably”. 

1 Ki 22:14 Micaiah said, “As Yahweh lives, I shall speak as Yahweh tells me!”. 

1 Ki 22:15 When he came to the king, the king said, “Micaiah, should we go and attack Ramoth in Gilead, or 
should we hold back?”. He replied, “Go ahead! Success is sure, for Yahweh has already given it to the king!”. 

1 Ki 22:16 The king then said, “How often must I put you on oath to tell me nothing but the truth in the name of 
Yahweh?”. 

1 Ki 22:1 7 Then he spoke out: I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains like sheep without a shepherd. And 
Yahweh said, “These have no master, let them all go safely home!”. 

1 Ki 22:1 8 At this the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not tell you that he never gives me favourable 
prophecies, but only unfavourable ones?”. 

1 Ki 22:1 9 Micaiah went on, “Now listen to the word of Yahweh. I saw Yahweh seated on his throne with the 
whole array of heaven standing by him, on his right and on his left. 

1 Ki 22:20 Yahweh said, ‘Who will entice Ahab into marching to his death at Ramoth in Gilead?’. At which some 
answered one way, and some another. 

1 Ki 22:21 A spirit then came forward and stood before Yahweh and said, ‘I will entice him’. 

1 Ki 22:22 ‘How?’. Yahweh asked. He replied, ‘I shall go and be a deceptive spirit in the mouths of all his 
prophets’. Yahweh said, ‘You will succeed in enticing him. Go and do it’. 

1 Ki 22:23 And now, you see, Yahweh has put a deceptive spirit into the mouths of all your prophets here, for in 
fact Yahweh has pronounced disaster on you”. 

1 Ki 22:24 Zedekiah son of Chenaanah then came up, struck Micaiah on the cheek and said, “Which way did 
Yahweh’s spirit leave me, to speak to you?”. 

1 Ki 22:25 “That is what you will find out”, Micaiah retorted, “the day you go from room to room, trying to hide”. 

1 Ki 22:26 The king of Israel said, “Seize Micaiah and hand him over to Amon, governor of the city, and Joash, 
the king’s son, 

1 Ki 22:27 and say, ‘These are the king’s orders: Put this man in prison and feed him on nothing but bread and 
water until I am safely home’”. 

1 Ki 22:28 Micaiah said, “If you ever do get home safely, Yahweh has not spoken through me”. 

1 Ki 22:29 The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah marched on Ramoth in Gilead. 

1 Ki 22:30 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I shall disguise myself to go into battle, but you put on your 
robes”. So the king of Israel disguised himself and went into battle. 

1 Ki 22:31 Now, the king of Aram had given his chariot commanders the following order, “Do not attack anyone 
of whatever rank, except the king of Israel”. 

1 Ki 22:32 So, when the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they thought, “That is obviously the king of 
Israel”, and surrounded him to attack. But when Jehoshaphat shouted his war cry 
1 Ki 22:33 the chariot commanders, realising that he was not the king of Israel, broke off their pursuit. 

1 Ki 22:34 Someöne, however, drawing his bow without any special aim, shot the king of Israel between the 
joints of his armour. “Turn about!”. said the king to his charioteer. “Get me out of the fighting; I am collapsing”. 

1 Ki 22:35 But the battle grew fiercer as the day went on and the king had to be held upright in his chariot facing 
the Aramaeans, the blood from the wound running into the bottom of the chariot, until in the evening he died. 

1 Ki 22:36 At sundown a shout ran through the ranks, “Every man back to his town, every man back to his 
country! 

1 Ki 22:37 The king is dead”. He was taken to Samaria and in Samaria the king was buried. 

1 Ki 22:38 They washed the chariot at the Pool of Samaria; the dogs licked up the blood, and the prostitutes 
washed in it, in accordance with the word which Yahweh had spoken. 

1 Ki 22:39 The rest of the history of Ahab, his entire career, the ivory house he erected, all the towns he built, is 
this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 

1 Ki 22:40 When Ahab fell asleep with his ancestors, his son Ahaziah succeeded him. 

1 Ki 22:41 Jehoshaphat son of Asa became king of Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel. 

1 Ki 22:42 Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for twenty-five 
years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Azubah daughter of Shilhi. 

1 Ki 22:43 In every way he followed the example of his father Asa undeviatingly, doing what is pleasing to 
Yahweh. 

1 Ki 22:44 The high places, however, were not abolished; the people still offered sacrifice and incense on the 
high places. 

1 Ki 22:45 Jehoshaphat was at peace with the king of Israel. 

1 Ki 22:46 The rest of the history of Jehoshaphat, the valour he showed, the wars he waged, is this not recorded 



in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 

1 Ki 22:47 The few male sacred prostitutes left over from the days of his father Asa, he expelled from the 
country. 

1 Ki 22:48 At the time, Edom had no king, and King 

1 Ki 22:49 Jehoshaphat built ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold, but they never made the voyage since the 
ships were wrecked at Ezion-Geber. 

1 Ki 22:50 Ahaziah son of Ahab then proposed to Jehoshaphat, “Let my men go to sea with yours”. But 
Jehoshaphat would not agree. 

1 Ki 22:51 When Jehoshaphat fell asleep with his ancestors he was buried in the City of his ancestor, David; his 
son Jehoram succeeded him. 

1 Ki 22:52 Ahaziah son of Ahab became king of Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of 
Judah, and reigned over Israel for two years. 

1 Ki 22:53 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, by following the example of his father and mother, and of 
Jeroboam son of Nebat who had led Israel into sin. 

1 Ki 22:54 He served Baal and worshipped him, and provoked the anger of Yahweh God of Israel just as his 
father had done. 

2Ki 1:1 After Ahab’s death Moab rebelled against Israel. 

2Ki 1 :2 Ahaziah had fallen from the balcony of his upper room in Samaria, and was lying ill; so he sent 
messengers, saying to them, “Go and consult Baal-Zebub god of Ekron and ask whether I shall recover from my 
illness”. 

2Ki 1 :3 But the angel of Yahweh said to Elijah the Tishbite, “Up! Go and intercept the king of Samaria’s 
messengers. Say to them, ‘Is there no God in Israel, for you to go and consult Baal-Zebub god of Ekron? 

2Ki 1:4 Yahweh says this: You will never leave the bed you have got into; you are certainly going to die’”. And 
Elijah set out. 

2Ki 1:5 The messengers returned to the king, who said, “Why have you come back?”. 

2Ki 1 :6 “A man came to meet us”, they answered. “He said, ‘Go back to the king who sent you and tell him: 
Yahweh says this: Is there no God in Israel, for you to go and consult Baal-Zebub god of Ekron? For this, you 
will never leave the bed you have got into; you are certainly going to die’”. 

2Ki 1 :7 He said, “This man who met you and said all this, what was he like?”. 

2Ki 1 :8 “A man wearing a hair cloak”, they answered, “and a leather loincloth”. “It was Elijah the Tishbite”, he said. 
2Ki 1 :9 He then sent a captain of fifty soldiers with his fifty men to Elijah, whom they found sitting on top of a hill; 
the captain went up to him and said, “Man of God, the king says, ‘Come down’”. 

2Ki 1:10 Elijah answered the captain, “If I am a man of God, may fire fall from heaven and destroy both you and 
your fifty men”. And fire fell from heaven and destroyed him and his fifty men. 

2Ki 1:11 The king sent a second captain of fifty to him, again with fifty men, and he too went up and said, “Man 
of God, this is the king’s order, ‘Come down at once’”. 

2Ki 1:12 Elijah answered them, “If I am a man of God, may fire fall from heaven and destroy both you and your 
fifty men”. And lightning fell from heaven and destroyed him and his fifty men. 

2Ki 1:13 The king then sent a third captain of fifty to him, with another fifty men. The third captain of fifty came 
up to Elijah, fell on his knees before him and pleaded with him. “Man of God”, he said, “may my life and the lives 
of these fifty servants of yours count for something in your eyes. 

2Ki 1:14 Fire has fallen from heaven and destroyed two captains of fifties and their companies, but this time 
may my life count for something in your eyes!”. 

2Ki 1:15 The angel of Yahweh said to Elijah, “Go down with him; do not be afraid of him”. He rose and 
accompanied him down to the king, 

2Ki 1:16 and said to him, “Yahweh says this, ‘Since you sent messengers to consult Baal-Zebub god of Ekron, 
you will never leave the bed you have got into; you are certainly going to die’”. 

2Ki 1:17 And, in accordance with the word of Yahweh which Elijah had uttered, he died. Since he had no son, 
his brother Jehoram succeeded him, in the second year of Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah. 

2Ki 1:18 The rest of the history of Ahaziah, and his career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Israel? 

2Ki 2:1 This is what happened when Yahweh took Elijah up to heaven in the whirlwind: Elijah and Elisha set out 
from Gilgal, 

2Ki 2:2 and Elijah said to Elisha, “You stay here, for Yahweh is only sending me to Bethel”. But Elisha replied, 

“As Yahweh lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you!”. and they went down to Bethel. 

2Ki 2:3 The brotherhood of prophets living at Bethel came out to meet Elisha and said, “Do you know that 
Yahweh will carry your lord and master away today?”. “Yes, I know”, he said, “be quiet”. 

2Ki 2:4 Elijah said, “Elisha, you stay here, Yahweh is only sending me to Jericho”. But he replied, “As Yahweh 
lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you!”. and they went on to Jericho. 



2Ki 2:5 The brotherhood of prophets living at Jericho went up to Elisha and said, “Do you know that Yahweh will 
carry your lord and master away today?”. “Yes, I know”, he said, “be quiet”. 

2Ki 2:6 Elijah said, “Elisha, you stay here, Yahweh is only sending me to the Jordan”. But he replied, “As Yahweh 
lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you!”. And they went on together. 

2Ki 2:7 Fifty of the brotherhood of prophets followed them, halting some distance away as the two of them stood 
beside the Jordan. 

2Ki 2:8 Elijah took his cloak, rolled it up and struck the water; and the water divided to left and right, and the two 
of them crossed over dry-shod. 

2Ki 2:9 When they had crossed, Elijah said to Elisha, “Make your request. What can I do for you before I am 
snatched away from you?”. Elisha answered, “Let me inherit a double share of your spirit”. 

2Ki 2:10 “Your request is difficult”, Elijah said. “If you see me while I am being snatched away from you, it will be 
as you ask; if not, it will not be so”. 

2Ki 2:11 Now as they walked on, talking as they went, a chariot of fire appeared and horses of fire coming 
between the two of them; and Elijah went up to heaven in the whirlwind. 

2Ki 2:12 Elisha saw it, and shouted, “My father! My father! Chariot of Israel and its chargers!”. Then he lost sight 
of him, and taking hold of his own clothes he tore them in half. 

2Ki 2:13 He picked up Elijah’s cloak which had fallen, and went back and stood on the bank of the Jordan. 

2Ki 2:14 He took Elijah’s cloak and struck the water. “Where is Yahweh, the God of Elijah?”. he cried. As he 
struck the water it divided to right and left, and Elisha crossed over. 

2Ki 2:15 The brotherhood of prophets saw him in the distance, and said, “The spirit of Elijah has come to rest on 
Elisha”; they went to meet him and bowed to the ground before him. 

2Ki 2:16 “Look”, they said, “your servants have fifty strong men with them, let them go and look for your master; 
the Spirit of Yahweh may have taken him up and thrown him down on a mountain or into a valley”. “Send no one”, 
he replied. 

2Ki 2:17 But they so shamed him with their insistence that he consented. So they sent fifty men who searched 
for three days without finding him. 

2Ki 2:18 They then came back to Elisha who had stayed in Jericho; he said, “Didn’t I tell you not to go?”. 

2Ki 2:19 The people of the city said to Elisha, “The city is pleasant to live in, as my lord indeed can see, but the 
water is foul and the country suffers from miscarriages”. 

2Ki 2:20 “Bring me a new bowl”, he said, “and put some salt in it”. They brought it to him. 

2Ki 2:21 Then he went to the source of the water, threw salt into it and said, “Yahweh says this, ‘I make this 
water wholesome: neither death nor miscarriage shall come from it any more’”. 

2Ki 2:22 And the water became wholesome, as it is today, exactly as Elisha had said it would. 

2Ki 2:23 From there he went up to Bethel, and while he was on the road, some small boys came out of the town 
and jeered at him. “Hurry up, baldy!”. they shouted. “Come on up, baldy!”. 

2Ki 2:24 He turned round and looked at them; and he cursed them in the name of Yahweh. And two bears came 
out of the forest and savaged forty-two of the boys. 

2Ki 2:25 From there he went on to Mount Carmel and then returned to Samaria. 

2Ki 3:1 Jehoram son of Ahab became king of Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of 
Judah, and reigned for twelve years. 

2Ki 3:2 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, though not like his father and mother, for he did away with the 
pillar to Baal which his father had made. 

2Ki 3:3 Nonetheless, he continued to practise the sins into which Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel and did 
not give them up. 

2Ki 3:4 Mesha king of Moab was a sheep-breeder and used to pay the king of Israel in tribute a hundred 
thousand lambs and a hundred thousand rams with their wool. 

2Ki 3:5 But when Ahab died, the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel. 

2Ki 3:6 At once King Jehoram left Samaria and mustered all Israel. 

2Ki 3:7 After this he sent word to the king of Judah, “The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will you go to 
war with me against Moab?”. “I will”, he replied. “I will be as you, my men as yours, my horses as yours”, 

2Ki 3:8 and added, “Which way are we to attack?”. “Through the desert of Edom”, the other answered. 

2Ki 3:9 So they set out, the king of Israel, the king of Judah and the king of Edom. They carried out a flanking 
movement for seven days, until there was no water left for the troops or for the beasts of their baggage train. 

2Ki 3:10 “Alas!”. the king of Israel exclaimed, “Yahweh has summoned us three kings, only to put us into the 
power of Moab”. 

2Ki 3:11 But the king of Judah said, “Is there no prophet of Yahweh here for us to consult Yahweh through him?”. 
One of the king of Israel’s servants answered, “Elisha son of Shaphat is here, who used to pour water on the 
hands of Elijah”. 

2Ki 3:12 “The word of Yahweh is with him”, the king of Judah said. So the king of Israel, the king of Judah and 



the king of Edom went to consult him. 

2Ki 3:13 But Elisha said to the king of Israel, “What business have you with me? Go to your father’s and your 
mother’s prophets”. “No”, the king of Israel answered, “Yahweh is the one who has summoned us three kings, 
only to put us into the power of Moab”. Elisha replied, 

2Ki 3:14 “By the life of Yahweh Sabaoth whom I serve, if I did not respect the king of Judah, I would take no 
notice of you, nor so much as look at you. 

2Ki 3:15 Now bring me someöne who can play the lyre”. And as the musician played, the hand of Yahweh came 
on him 

2Ki 3:16 and he said, “Yahweh says this, ‘Dig in this valley ditch after ditch’, 

2Ki 3:17 for Yahweh says, ‘You will see no wind, you will see no rain, but this valley will become full of water, 
and you and your troops and your baggage animals will drink’. 

2Ki 3:18 But this is only a trifle in Yahweh’s eyes, for he will put Moab itself into your power. 

2Ki 3:19 You will storm every fortified town, fell every productive tree, block every water-hole, ruin all the best 
fields with stones”. 

2Ki 3:20 Next morning at the time when the oblation was being offered, water came from the direction of Edom, 
and the whole terrain was flooded. 

2Ki 3:21 When the Moabites learned that the kings were advancing to fight them, all those of an age to bear 
arms were mobilised; they took up position on the frontier. 

2Ki 3:22 In the morning when they got up, the sun was shining on the water; and in the distance the Moabites 
saw the water as red as blood. 

2Ki 3:23 “This is blood!”. they said. “The kings must have fought among themselves and killed one another. So 
now for the booty, Moab!”. 

2Ki 3:24 But when they reached the Israelite camp, the Israelites launched their attack and the Moabites fled 
before them, and as they advanced they cut the Moabites to pieces. 

2Ki 3:25 They laid the towns in ruins, and each man threw a stone into all the best fields to fill them up, and they 
blocked every water-hole and felled every productive tree. In the end, there was only Kir-Hareseth left, which the 
slingers surrounded and bombarded. 

2Ki 3:26 When the king of Moab saw that the battle had turned against him, he mustered seven hundred 
swordsmen in the hope of breaking a way out and going to the king of Aram, but he failed. 

2Ki 3:27 Then he took his eldest son who was to succeed him and offered him as a sacrifice on the city wall. 
Alarmed at this, the Israelites withdrew and retired to their own territory. 

2Ki 4:1 The wife of a member of the prophetic brotherhood appealed to Elisha. “Your servant my husband is 
dead”, she said, “and you know how your servant revered Yahweh. A creditor has now come to take my two 
children and make them his slaves”. 

2Ki 4:2 Elisha said, “What can I do for you? Tell me, what have you got in the house?”. “Your servant has nothing 
in the house”, she replied, “except a flask of oil”. 

2Ki 4:3 Then he said, “Go outside and borrow jars from all your neighbours, empty jars and not too few. 

2Ki 4:4 When you come back, shut the door on yourself and your sons, and pour the oil into all these jars, 
putting each aside when it is full”. 

2Ki 4:5 So she left him; and she shut the door on herself and her sons; they passed her the jars and she went 
on pouring. 

2Ki 4:6 When the jars were full, she said to her son, “Pass me another jar”. “There are no more”, he replied. Then 
the oil stopped flowing. 

2Ki 4:7 She went and told the man of God, who said, “Go and sell the oil and redeem your pledge; you and your 
children can live on the remainder”. 

2Ki 4:8 One day as Elisha was on his way to Shunem, a woman of rank who lived there pressed him to stay and 
eat there. After this he always broke his journey for a meal when he passed that way. 

2Ki 4:9 She said to her husband, “Look, I am sure the man who is constantly passing our way must be a holy 
man of God. 

2Ki 4:10 Let us build him a small walled room, and put him a bed in it, and a table and chair and lamp; 
whenever he comes to us he can rest there”. 

2Ki 4:1 1 One day when he came, he retired to the upper room and lay down. 

2Ki 4:12 He said to his servant Gehazi, “Call our Shunammite”. He called her and when she appeared, Elisha 
said, 

2Ki 4:13 “Tell her this: ‘Look, you have gone to all this trouble for us, what can we do for you? Is there anything 
you would like said for you to the king or to the commander of the army?’”. But she replied, “I live with my own 
people about me”. 

2Ki 4:14 “What can I do for you then?”. he asked. Gehazi replied, “Well, she has no son and her husband is old”. 
2Ki 4:15 Elisha said, “Call her”. The servant called her and she stood at the door. 



2Ki 4:16 “This time next year”, he said, “you will hold a son in your arms”. But she said, “No, my lord, do not 
deceive your servant”. 

2Ki 4:17 But the woman did conceive, and she gave birth to a son at the time that Elisha had said she would. 

2Ki 4:18 The child grew up; one day he went to his father who was with the reapers, 

2Ki 4:19 and exclaimed to his father, “Oh, my head! My head!”. The father told a servant to carry him to his 
mother. 

2Ki 4:20 He lifted him up and took him to his mother, and the boy lay on her lap until midday, when he died. 

2Ki 4:21 She went upstairs, laid him on the bed of the man of God, shut the door on him and went out. 

2Ki 4:22 She called her husband and said, “Send me one of the servants with a donkey. I must hurry to the man 
of God and back”. 

2Ki 4:23 “Why go to him today?”. he asked. “It is not New Moon or Sabbath”. But she replied, “Never mind”. 

2Ki 4:24 She had the donkey saddled and said to her servant, “Lead on, go! Do not draw rein until I give the 
order”. 

2Ki 4:25 She set off and made her way to the man of God at Mount Carmel. When the man of God saw her in 
the distance, he said to his servant Gehazi, “Look, here comes our Shunammite! 

2Ki 4:26 Now run and meet her and ask her, ‘Are you well? Is your husband well? Your child well?’”. “Yes”, she 
replied. 

2Ki 4:27 When she came to the man of God there on the mountain, she took hold of his feet. Gehazi stepped 
forward to push her away, but the man of God said, “Leave her; there is bitterness in her soul and Yahweh has 
hidden it from me, he has not told me”. 

2Ki 4:28 She said, “Did I ask my lord for a son? Did I not say: Don’t deceive me?”. 

2Ki 4:29 Elisha said to Gehazi, “Hitch up your clothes, take my staff in your hand and go. If you meet anyone, do 
not greet him; if anyone greets you, do not answer him. You are to stretch out my staff over the child”. 

2Ki 4:30 But the child’s mother said, “As Yahweh lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you”. Then he 
stood up and followed her. 

2Ki 4:31 Gehazi had gone ahead of them and had stretched out the staff over the child, but there was no sound 
or response. He went back to meet Elisha and told him. “The child has not woken up”, he said. 

2Ki 4:32 Elisha then went to the house, and there on his bed lay the child, dead. 

2Ki 4:33 He went in and shut the door on the two of them and prayed to Yahweh. 

2Ki 4:34 Then he climbed on to the bed and stretched himself on top of the child, putting his mouth on his 
mouth, his eyes to his eyes, and his hands on his hands, and as he lowered himself on to him, the child’s flesh 
grew warm. 

2Ki 4:35 Then he got up and walked to and fro inside the house, and then climbed on to the bed again and 
lowered himself on to the child seven times in all; then the child sneezed and opened his eyes. 

2Ki 4:36 He then summoned Gehazi. “Call our Shunammite”, he said. He called her. When she came to him, he 
said, “Pick up your son”. 

2Ki 4:37 She went in and, falling at his feet, prostrated herself on the floor and then picked up her son and went 
out. 

2Ki 4:38 Elisha went back to Gilgal while there was famine in the country. As the brotherhood of prophets were 
sitting with him, he said to his servant, “Put the large pot on the fire and cook some soup for the brotherhood”. 

2Ki 4:39 One of them went into the fields to gather herbs and came on some wild vine, off which he gathered 
enough gourds to fill his lap. On his return, he cut them up into the pot of soup; they did not know what they 
were. 

2Ki 4:40 They then poured the soup out for the men to eat, but they had no sooner tasted the soup than they 
cried, “Man of God, there is death in the pot!”. And they could not eat it. 

2Ki 4:41 “Bring some meal then”, Elisha said. This he threw into the pot, and said, “Pour out, for the company to 
eat!”. And there was nothing harmful in the pot. 

2Ki 4:42 A man came from Baal-Shalishah, bringing the man of God bread from the first-fruits, twenty barley 
loaves and fresh grain still in the husk. “Give it to the company to eat”, Elisha said. 

2Ki 4:43 But his servant replied, “How can I serve this to a hundred men?”. “Give it to the company to eat”, he 
insisted, “for Yahweh says this, ‘They will eat and have some left over’”. 

2Ki 4:44 He served them; they ate and had some left over, as Yahweh had said. 

2Ki 5:1 Naaman, army commander to the king of Aram, was a man who enjoyed his master’s respect and 
favour, since through him Yahweh had granted victory to the Aramaeans. 

2Ki 5:2 But the man suffered from a virulent skin-disease. Now, on one of their raids into Israelite territory, the 
Aramaeans had carried off a little girl, who became a servant of Naaman’s wife. 

2Ki 5:3 She said to her mistress, “If only my master would approach the prophet of Samaria! He would cure him 
of his skin-disease”. 

2Ki 5:4 Naaman went and told his master. “This and this”, he reported, “is what the girl from Israel has said”. 



2Ki 5:5 “Go by all means”, said the king of Aram, “I shall send a letter to the king of Israel”. So Naaman left, 
taking with him ten talents of silver, six thousand shekels of gold and ten festal robes. 

2Ki 5:6 He presented the letter to the king of Israel. It read, “With this letter, I am sending my servant Naaman to 
you for you to cure him of his skin-disease”. 

2Ki 5:7 When the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his clothes. “Am I a god to give death and life”, he said, 

“for him to send a man to me and ask me to cure him of his skin-disease? Listen to this and take note of it and 
see how he intends to pick a quarrel with me”. 

2Ki 5:8 When Elisha heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes, he sent word to the king, “Why have you 
torn your clothes? Let him come to me, and he will find there is a prophet in Israel”. 

2Ki 5:9 So Naaman came with his team and chariot and drew up at the door of Elisha’s house. 

2Ki 5:10 And Elisha sent him a messenger to say, “Go and bathe seven times in the Jordan, and your flesh will 
become clean once more”. 

2Ki 5:1 1 But Naaman was indignant and went off, saying, “Here was I, thinking he would be sure to come out to 
me, and stand there, and call on the name of Yahweh his God, and wave his hand over the spot and cure the 
part that was diseased. 

2Ki 5:12 Surely, Abana and Parpar, the rivers of Damascus, are better than any water in Israel? Could I not 
bathe in them and become clean?”. And he turned round and went off in a rage. 

2Ki 5:13 But his servants approached him and said, “Father, if the prophet had asked you to do something 
difficult, would you not have done it? All the more reason, then, when he says to you, ‘Bathe, and you will 
become clean’”. 

2Ki 5:14 So he went down and immersed himself seven times in the Jordan, as Elisha had told him to do. And 
his flesh became clean once more like the flesh of a little child. 

2Ki 5:15 Returning to Elisha with his whole escort, he went in and, presenting himself, said, “Now I know that 
there is no God anywhere on earth except in Israel. Now, please, accept a present from your servant”. 

2Ki 5:16 But Elisha replied, “As Yahweh lives, whom I serve, I will accept nothing”. Naaman pressed him to 
accept, but he refused. 

2Ki 5:17 Then Naaman said, “Since your answer is ‘No’, allow your servant to be given as much earth as two 
mules may carry, since your servant will no longer make burnt offerings or sacrifice to any god except Yahweh. 
2Ki 5:18 Only — and may Yahweh forgive your servant for this — when my master goes to the temple of Rimmon 
to worship there, he leans on my arm, and I bow down in the temple of Rimmon when he does; may Yahweh 
forgive your servant for doing this!”. 

2Ki 5:19 “Go in peace”, Elisha replied. 

2Ki 5:20 Naaman had gone a small distance, when Gehazi, Elisha’s servant, said to himself, “My master has let 
this Aramaean Naaman off lightly, by not accepting what he offered. As Yahweh lives, I will run after him and get 
something out of him”. 

2Ki 5:21 So Gehazi set off in pursuit of Naaman. When Naaman saw him running after him, he jumped down 
from his chariot to meet him. “Is all well?”. he asked. 

2Ki 5:22 “All is well”, he said. “My master has sent me to say, ‘This very moment two young men of the prophetic 
brotherhood have arrived from the highlands of Ephraim. Be kind enough to give them a talent of silver and two 
festal robes’”. 

2Ki 5:23 “Please accept two talents”, Naaman replied, and pressed him, tying up the two talents of silver in two 
bags with the two festal robes and consigning them to two of his servants who carried them ahead of Gehazi. 

2Ki 5:24 When he reached Ophel, he took these from them and put them away in the house. He then dismissed 
the men, who went away. 

2Ki 5:25 He, for his part, went and presented himself to his master. Elisha said, “Gehazi, where have you been?”. 
“Your servant has not been anywhere”, he replied. 

2Ki 5:26 But Elisha said to him, “Was not my heart present there when someöne left his chariot to meet you? 
Now you have taken the money, you can buy gardens with it, and olive groves, sheep and oxen, male and 
female slaves. 

2Ki 5:27 But Naaman’s disease of the skin will cling to you and your descendants for ever”. And Gehazi left his 
presence white as snow from skin-disease. 

2Ki 6:1 The brotherhood of prophets said to Elisha, “Look, the place where we are living with you is too small for 
us. 

2Ki 6:2 Let us go to the Jordan, then, and each of us cut a beam there, and we will make our living quarters 
there”. He replied, “Go”. 

2Ki 6:3 “Be good enough to go with your servants”, one of them said. “I will go”, he replied, 

2Ki 6:4 and went with them. On reaching the Jordan they began cutting down timber. 

2Ki 6:5 But, as one of them was felling his beam, the iron axehead fell into the water. “Alas, my lord”, he 
exclaimed, “and it was a borrowed one too!”. 



2Ki 6:6 “Where did it fall?”. the man of God asked; and he showed him the spot. Then, cutting a stick, Elisha 
threw it in at that point and made the iron axehead float. 

2Ki 6:7 “Lift it out”, he said; and the man stretched out his hand and took it. 

2Ki 6:8 The king of Aram was at war with Israel. He conferred with his officers and said, “You must attack at 
such and such a place”. 

2Ki 6:9 Elisha, however, sent word to the king of Israel, “Be on your guard about such and such a place, 
because the Aramaeans are going to attack it”. 

2Ki 6:10 The king of Israel accordingly sent men to the place which Elisha had named. And he kept warning the 
king, and the king stayed on the alert; and this happened more than once or twice. 

2Ki 6:11 The king of Aram grew very much disturbed over this. He summoned his officers, and said, “Tell me 
which of you is betraying us to the king of Israel”. 

2Ki 6:12 “No one, my lord king”, one of his officers replied. “It is Elisha, the prophet in Israel. The words you utter 
in your bedchamber, he reveals to the king of Israel”. 

2Ki 6:13 “Go and find out where he is”, the king said, “so that I can send people to capture him”. Word was 
brought to him, “He is now in Dothan”. 

2Ki 6:14 So he sent horses and chariots there, and a large force; and these, arriving during the night, 
surrounded the town. 

2Ki 6:15 Next day, Elisha got up early and went out; and there surrounding the town was an armed force with 
horses and chariots. “Oh, my lord”, his servant said, “what are we to do?”. 

2Ki 6:16 “Do not be afraid”, he replied, “for there are more on our side than on theirs”. 

2Ki 6:17 And Elisha prayed. “Yahweh”, he said, “open his eyes and make him see”. Yahweh opened the 
servant’s eyes, and he saw the mountain covered in fiery horses and chariots surrounding Elisha. 

2Ki 6:18 As the Aramaeans came down towards him, Elisha prayed to Yahweh, “I beg you to strike these people 
sun-blind”. And, at Elisha’s word, he struck them sun-blind. 

2Ki 6:19 Then Elisha said to them, “This is not the road, nor is this the town. Follow me; I shall lead you to the 
man you are looking for”. But he led them to Samaria. 

2Ki 6:20 As they entered Samaria, Elisha said, “Yahweh, open these people’s eyes, and let them see”. Yahweh 
opened their eyes and they saw; they were inside Samaria. 

2Ki 6:21 When the king of Israel saw them, he said to Elisha, “Shall I kill them, father?”. 

2Ki 6:22 “Do not kill them”, he replied. “Do you kill your own prisoners with sword and bow? Offer them food and 
water, so that they can eat and drink, and then let them go back to their master”. 

2Ki 6:23 So the king provided a great feast for them; and when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them off and 
they went back to their master. Aramaean raiding parties never invaded the territory of Israel again. 

2Ki 6:24 It happened after this that Ben-Hadad king of Aram, mustering his whole army, marched on and laid 
siege to Samaria. 

2Ki 6:25 In Samaria there was great famine, and so strict was the siege that the head of a donkey sold for 
eighty shekels of silver, and one quarter-kab of wild onions for five shekels of silver. 

2Ki 6:26 Now as the king was passing along the city wall, a woman shouted, “Help, my lord king!”. 

2Ki 6:27 “If Yahweh does not help you”, he retorted, “where can I find help for you? From the threshing-floor? 
From the winepress?”. 

2Ki 6:28 Then the king asked, “What is the matter?”. “This woman here”, she answered, “said to me, ‘Give up 
your son; we will eat him today, and eat my son tomorrow’. 

2Ki 6:29 So we cooked my son and ate him. Next day, I said to her, ‘Give up your son for us to eat’. But she 
has hidden her son”. 

2Ki 6:30 On hearing the woman’s words, the king tore his clothes; the king was walking on the wall, and the 
people saw that underneath he was wearing sackcloth next his body. 

2Ki 6:31 “May God bring unnameable ills on me, and worse ills, too”, he said, “if the head of Elisha son of 
Shaphat remains on his shoulders today!”. 

2Ki 6:32 Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. The king sent a messenger ahead 
but, before the man arrived, Elisha had said to the elders, “Do you see how this son of a murderer has given 
orders to cut off my head? Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door; hold the door against him. Isn’t that 
the sound of his master’s step behind him?”. 

2Ki 6:33 He was still actually speaking, when the king arrived and said, “This misery plainly comes from 
Yahweh. Why should I still trust in Yahweh?”. 

2Ki 7:1 “Listen to the word of Yahweh”, Elisha said. “Yahweh says this, ‘By this time tomorrow a measure of 
finest flour will sell for one shekel, and two measures of barley for one shekel, at the gate of Samaria’”. 

2Ki 7:2 The equerry on whose arm the king was leaning retorted to Elisha, “Even if Yahweh made windows in 
the sky, could this word come true?”. “You will see it with your own eyes”, Elisha replied, “though you will eat none 
of it”. 



2Ki 7:3 Now at the entrance to the gate — for they were afflicted with virulent skin-disease — there were four 
men and they debated among themselves, “Why sit here waiting for death? 

2Ki 7:4 If we decide to go into the city, what with the famine in it, we shall die there; if we stay where we are, we 
shall die just the same. Come on, let us go over to the Aramaean camp; if they spare our lives, we live; if they kill 
us, well, then we die”. 

2Ki 7:5 So at dusk they set out and made for the Aramaean camp, but when they reached the confines of the 
camp there was not a soul there. 

2Ki 7:6 For Yahweh had caused the Aramaeans in their camp to hear a noise of chariots and horses, the noise 
of a great army; and they had said to one another, “Listen! The king of Israel has hired the Hittite and Egyptian 
kings against us, to attack us”. 

2Ki 7:7 So in the dusk they had made off and fled, abandoning their tents, their horses and their donkeys; 
leaving the camp just as it was, they had fled for their lives. 

2Ki 7:8 The men with skin-disease, then, reached the confines of the camp. They went into one of the tents and 
ate and drank, and from it carried off silver and gold and clothing; these they took and hid. Then they came back 
and, entering another tent, looted it too, and took and hid their booty. 

2Ki 7:9 Then they said to one another, “We are doing wrong. This is a day of good news, yet we are holding our 
tongues! If we wait till morning, we shall certainly be punished. Come on, let us go and take the news to the 
palace”. 

2Ki 7:10 Off they went and shouted out to the guards on the city gate, “We have been to the Aramaean camp. 
There was not a soul there, no sound of anyone, only tethered horses and tethered donkeys, and their tents just 
as they were”. 

2Ki 7:1 1 The gatekeepers shouted the news, which was reported inside the palace. 

2Ki 7:12 The king got up while it was still dark and said to his officers, “I can tell you what the Aramaeans have 
done to us. They know we are starving, so they have left the camp to hide in the open country. ‘They will come 
out of the city’, they think, ‘we shall catch them alive and get into the city’”. 

2Ki 7:13 One of his officers replied, “Five of the surviving horses still left us had better be taken — they would die 
in any case like all the rest. Let us send them and see”. 

2Ki 7:14 So they took two chariot teams and the king sent them after the Aramaean army, saying, “Go and see”. 
2Ki 7:15 They followed them as far as the Jordan, finding the whole way strewn with clothes and gear which the 
Aramaeans had thrown away in their panic. The scouts returned and informed the king. 

2Ki 7:16 Then the people went out and plundered the Aramaean camp: a measure of finest flour sold for one 
shekel, and two measures of barley for one shekel, as Yahweh had promised they would. 

2Ki 7:17 The king had detailed the equerry, on whose arm he leaned, as commander of the guard on the gate, 
but the people trampled on him in the gateway and he died, as the man of God had foretold when the king had 
come down to him. 

2Ki 7:18 (What Elisha had said to the king came true, “Two measures of barley will sell for one shekel, and a 
measure of finest flour for one shekel, by this time tomorrow at the gate of Samaria”. 

2Ki 7:19 And the equerry in question had replied to the man of God, “Even if Yahweh made windows in the sky, 
could this word come true?”. “You will see it with your own eyes”, Elisha had answered, “though you will eat none 
of it”. 

2Ki 7:20 And that was what happened to him: for the people trampled on him in the gateway and he died.) 

2Ki 8:1 Elisha had said to the woman whose son he had raised to life, “Move away with your family, and live 
where you can in some foreign country, for Yahweh has called up a famine — it is already coming on the country 
— for seven years”. 

2Ki 8:2 The woman hurried to do what the man of God had told her: she set out, she and her family, and for 
seven years she lived in Philistine territory. 

2Ki 8:3 When the seven years were over, the woman returned from Philistine territory and went to lodge a claim 
with the king for her house and land. 

2Ki 8:4 Now the king was talking to Gehazi, the servant of the man of God. “Tell me”, he was saying, “all about 
the marvels which Elisha did”. 

2Ki 8:5 Gehazi was just telling the king how Elisha had raised the dead child to life, when the woman whose son 
Elisha had raised lodged her claim with the king for her house and land. “My lord king”, Gehazi said, “this is the 
very woman, and that is her son whom Elisha raised to life”. 

2Ki 8:6 The king questioned the woman, who told him the story. The king then delegated one of the officials to 
her with this order, “See that all her property is restored to her, and all the revenue from her land from the day 
she left the country until now”. 

2Ki 8:7 Elisha went to Damascus. Ben-Hadad king of Aram was ill, and was told, “The man of God has come all 
the way to us”. 

2Ki 8:8 Then the king said to Hazael, “Take a present with you and go and meet the man of God; consult 



Yahweh through him, and find out if I shall recover from my illness”. 

2Ki 8:9 So Hazael went to meet Elisha, taking with him as a present the best that Damascus could offer, a load 
for forty camels. He arrived and, presenting himself, said, “Your son Ben-Hadad king of Aram has sent me to ask 
you, ‘Shall I recover from my illness?’”. 

2Ki 8:10 Elisha replied, “Go and tell him, ‘You might recover’, though Yahweh has shown me that he will 
certainly die”. 

2Ki 8:1 1 Then the face of the man of God went rigid, and his look grew strangely fixed, and he wept. 

2Ki 8:12 “Why”, Hazael asked, “does my lord weep?”. “Because I know”, Elisha replied, “what harm you will do to 
the Israelites: you will burn down their fortresses, put their picked warriors to the sword, dash their little children 
to pieces, disembowel their pregnant women”. 

2Ki 8:13 “But what is your servant?”. Hazael said. “How could this dog achieve anything so great?”. “In a vision 
from Yahweh”, Elisha replied, “I have seen you king of Aram”. 

2Ki 8:14 Leaving Elisha, Hazael went back to his master who asked, “What did Elisha say to you?”. He replied, 
“He told me that you might recover”. 

2Ki 8:15 Next day he took a blanket, soaked it in water, and spread it over his face. So died Ben-Hadad, and 
Hazael succeeded him. 

2Ki 8:16 In the fifth year of Jehoram son of Ahab, king of Israel, Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat became king of 
Judah. 

2Ki 8:17 He was thirty-two years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem. 
2Ki 8:18 He followed the example of the kings of Israel as the House of Ahab were doing; he had married one of 
Ahab’s daughters; and he did what is displeasing to Yahweh. 

2Ki 8:19 But Yahweh was unwilling to destroy Judah, because of his servant David, and was faithful to the 
promise which he had made him to leave him a lamp for ever in his presence. 

2Ki 8:20 In his time Edom threw off the domination of Judah and set up a king for itself. 

2Ki 8:21 Jehoram crossed to Zair, and with him all the chariots … Under cover of dark, he and his chariot 
commanders broke through the Edomites surrounding him; the people fled to their tents. 

2Ki 8:22 Even so, Edom threw off the domination of Judah, remaining free to the present day. Libnah also 
revolted at that time. 

2Ki 8:23 The rest of the history of Jehoram, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of 
the Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 8:24 Then Jehoram fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried with them in the City of David; his son 
Ahaziah succeeded him. 

2Ki 8:25 In the twelfth year of Jehoram son of Ahab, king of Israel, Ahaziah son of Jehoram, king of Judah, 
became king. 

2Ki 8:26 Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for one year in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah granddaughter of Omri king of Israel. 

2Ki 8:27 He followed the example of the House of Ahab and did what is displeasing to Yahweh, as the House of 
Ahab were doing, to whom he was related by marriage. 

2Ki 8:28 He went with Jehoram son of Ahab to make war on Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth in Gilead, but the 
Aramaeans wounded Jehoram. 

2Ki 8:29 King Jehoram returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds which he had received at Ramah, 
fighting against Hazael king of Aram. Ahaziah son of Jehoram, king of Judah, went down to Jezreel to visit 
Jehoram son of Ahab because he was ailing. 

2Ki 9:1 The prophet Elisha summoned a member of the prophetic brotherhood to him, “Hitch up your clothes, 
take this flask of oil, and go to Ramoth in Gilead. 

2Ki 9:2 When you arrive there, look for Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi. Then, when you find him, tell 
him to get up and leave his companions, and take him into an inner room. 

2Ki 9:3 Take the flask of oil then and pour it over his head, and say, ‘Yahweh says this: I have anointed you 
king of Israel’. Then open the door and flee as fast as you can”. 

2Ki 9:4 The young man left for Ramoth in Gilead 

2Ki 9:5 and when he arrived, found the senior officers of the army sitting together. “I have a message for you, 
commander”, he said. “For which of us?”. asked Jehu. “For you, commander”, he answered. 

2Ki 9:6 Jehu then got up and went into the house. And the young man poured the oil on his head, saying, 
“Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘I have anointed you king of Yahweh’s people, of Israel. 

2Ki 9:7 You will strike down the family of Ahab your master, and I shall avenge the blood of my servants the 
prophets and all of Yahweh’s servants, on Jezebel 

2Ki 9:8 and on the whole family of Ahab. I shall destroy every manjack of Ahab’s family, fettered or free in Israel. 
2Ki 9:9 I shall make the House of Ahab like the House of Jeroboam son of Nebat and of Baasha son of Ahijah. 
2Ki 9:10 As for Jezebel, the dogs will eat her in the field of Jezreel; no one will bury her’”. With this, he opened 



the door and made his escape. 

2Ki 9:1 1 Jehu came out to his master’s officers. “Is all well?”. they asked him. “Why did this madman come to 
you?”. “You know the fellow and how he talks”, he answered. 

2Ki 9:12 “Evasion!”. they cried, “Come on, tell us”. He replied, “He said this and that to me. He said, ‘Yahweh says 
this: I have anointed you king of Israel’”. 

2Ki 9:13 Whereupon they all took their cloaks and spread them under him on the bare steps; they sounded the 
trumpet and shouted, “Jehu is king!”. 

2Ki 9:14 Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi plotted against Jehoram. (At the time, Jehoram, with all Israel, 
was holding Ramoth in Gilead against an attack by Hazael king of Aram, 

2Ki 9:15 but King Jehoram had gone back to Jezreel to recover from the wounds which he had received from 
the Aramaeans while he was fighting against Hazael king of Aram.) “If you agree”, Jehu said, “let no one leave 
the town to go and take the news to Jezreel”. 

2Ki 9:16 Jehu then mounted his chariot and left for Jezreel; Jehoram had taken to his bed there, and Ahaziah 
king of Judah had gone down to visit him. 

2Ki 9:17 The lookout posted on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu’s troop approaching. “I can see a body of men”, 
he shouted. Jehoram gave the order: “Have a horseman sent to meet them and ask, ‘Is all well?’”. 

2Ki 9:18 The horseman went to meet Jehu and said, “The king says, ‘Is all well?’”. “What has it to do with you 
whether all is well?”. Jehu replied. “Fall in behind me”. The lookout reported, “The messenger has reached them 
and is not coming back”. 

2Ki 9:19 The king sent a second horseman who reached them and said, “The king says, ‘Is all well?’”. “What has 
it to do with you whether all is well?”. Jehu replied. “Fall in behind me”. 

2Ki 9:20 The lookout reported, “He has reached them and is not coming back. The manner of driving is like that 
of Jehu son of Nimshi: he drives like a madman”. 

2Ki 9:21 “Harness!”. Jehoram cried; and they harnessed his chariot. Then Jehoram king of Israel and Ahaziah 
king of Judah, each in his chariot, set out to meet Jehu. They reached him in the field of Naboth of Jezreel. 

2Ki 9:22 As soon as Jehoram saw Jehu he asked, “Is all well, Jehu?”. “What a question!”. he replied, “when all the 
while the prostitutions and countless sorceries of your mother Jezebel go on”. 

2Ki 9:23 At this, Jehoram wheeled and fled, saying to Ahaziah, “Treason, Ahaziah!”. 

2Ki 9:24 But Jehu had drawn his bow; he struck Jehoram between the shoulder-blades, the arrow went through 
the king’s heart, and he sank down in his chariot. 

2Ki 9:25 “Pick him up”, Jehu said to Bidkar, his equerry, “and throw him into the field of Naboth of Jezreel. 
Remember how, when you and I manned a chariot together behind Ahab his father, Yahweh pronounced this 
sentence against him, 

2Ki 9:26 ‘This I swear. Yesterday I saw the blood of Naboth and the blood of his sons — Yahweh says this. And 
in this same field I shall requite you — Yahweh says this’. So pick him up, and throw him into the field, as 
Yahweh declared should happen!”. 

2Ki 9:27 When Ahaziah king of Judah saw this, he fled along the Beth-ha-Gan road, but Jehu went in pursuit of 
him. “Strike him down too”, he said. And they wounded him in his chariot at the slope of Gur, which is near 
Ibleam, and he took refuge in Megiddo, where he died. 

2Ki 9:28 His servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem and buried him in his tomb in the City of David. 

2Ki 9:29 Ahaziah had become king of Judah in the eleventh year of Jehoram son of Ahab. 

2Ki 9:30 When Jehu went back to Jezreel, Jezebel was told. She made up her eyes with mascara, adorned her 
head and appeared at the window. 

2Ki 9:31 As Jehu came through the gateway she said, “How did Zimri get on after killing his master?”. 

2Ki 9:32 Jehu looked up to the window and said, “Who is on my side? Who?”. And two or three officials looked 
down at him. 

2Ki 9:33 “Throw her down”, he said. They threw her down and her blood spattered the walls and the horses; and 
Jehu rode over her. 

2Ki 9:34 He went in and ate and drank, then said, “See to this accursed woman, and give her burial; after all, 
she was a king’s daughter”. 

2Ki 9:35 But when they went to bury her, they found nothing but her skull, feet and hands. 

2Ki 9:36 They came back and told Jehu, who said, “This is the word of Yahweh which he spoke through his 
servant Elijah the Tishbite, ‘The dogs will eat the flesh of Jezebel in the field of Jezreel; 

2Ki 9:37 the corpse of Jezebel will be like dung spread on the fields, so that no one will be able to say: This was 
Jezebel’”. 

2Ki 10:1 There were seventy of Ahab’s sons in Samaria. Jehu sent to Samaria, to the authorities of the city, to 
the elders and to the guardians of Ahab’s children. He said, 

2Ki 10:2 “Now, when this letter reaches you, you have your master’s sons with you; you also have chariots and 
horses, a fortified city and weapons. 



2Ki 10:3 See which of your master’s sons is the best and worthiest, put him on his father’s throne and fight for 
your master’s dynasty!”. 

2Ki 10:4 They were utterly terrified. “We have seen how the two kings could not stand up to him”, they said, “so 
how could we?”. 

2Ki 10:5 Consequently the master of the palace, the governor of the city, the elders and the guardians sent 
word to Jehu, “We are your servants. We shall do whatever you order us. We shall not proclaim a king; act as 
you think best”. 

2Ki 10:6 Jehu then wrote them a second letter. He said, “If you are for me and if you are prepared to accept 
orders from me, take the heads of the men of your master’s family and come to me at Jezreel by this time 
tomorrow”. (There were seventy of Ahab’s sons being educated there by the leading men of the city.) 

2Ki 10:7 When this letter reached them, they took the king’s sons and butchered all seventy of them, put their 
heads in baskets and sent them to him at Jezreel. 

2Ki 10:8 The messenger came and told Jehu, “They have brought the heads of the king’s sons”. “Leave them in 
two heaps at the entrance to the gate until morning”, he replied. 

2Ki 10:9 When morning came, he went out and, standing, said to all the people, “No guilt attaches to you! I did 
indeed plot against my master and have killed him; but what about all these? Who struck them? 

2Ki 10:10 Know, then, that nothing will fail to be fulfilled of the prophecy uttered by Yahweh against the House 
of Ahab; Yahweh has done what he said through his servant Elijah”. 

2Ki 10:11 Jehu then killed every member of the House of Ahab surviving in Jezreel, all his leading men, his 
close friends, his priests; he did not leave a single one alive. 

2Ki 10:12 Jehu then set out for Samaria. As he was on his way, at Beth-Eked of the Shepherds, 

2Ki 10:13 he met the brothers of Ahaziah king of Judah. “Who are you?”. he asked. “We are Ahaziah’s brothers”, 
they replied, “and we are on our way to pay our respects to the king’s sons and the queen mother’s sons”. 

2Ki 10:14 “Take them alive”, he said. They took them alive, and he slaughtered them at the storage-well of Beth- 
Eked, forty-two of them; he did not spare a single one. 

2Ki 10:15 Leaving there, he came on Jehonadab son of Rechab who was on his way to meet him. He greeted 
him and said, “Is your heart true to mine, as my heart is to yours?”. Jehonadab replied, “Yes”. “If so”, Jehu said, 
“give me your hand”. Jehonadab gave him his hand, and Jehu took him up beside him in his chariot. 

2Ki 10:16 “Come with me”, he said, “and witness my zeal for Yahweh”, and took him along in his chariot. 

2Ki 10:17 When he entered Samaria, he killed all the survivors of Ahab’s family there; he destroyed it, as 
Yahweh had told Elijah it would happen. 

2Ki 10:18 Then Jehu assembled all the people. “Ahab did Baal some small service”, he said, “but Jehu will do 
him a great one. 

2Ki 10:19 Now call me all the prophets of Baal and all his priests. Not one is to be absent: I have a great 
sacrifice to offer to Baal. If anyone is absent, he will forfeit his life”. This was a trick on Jehu’s part to destroy the 
devotees of Baal. 

2Ki 10:20 “Summon a sacred assembly for Baal”, he commanded; and they summoned it. 

2Ki 10:21 Jehu sent messengers throughout Israel, and all the devotees of Baal arrived, not a man was left who 
did not attend. They crowded into the temple of Baal until it was full from wall to wall. 

2Ki 10:22 Jehu then said to the keeper of the wardrobe, “Bring out vestments for all the devotees of Baal”; he 
brought out the vestments for them. 

2Ki 10:23 Jehu then went into the temple of Baal with Jehonadab son of Rechab and said to Baal’s devotees, 
“Make quite sure that there are no devotees of Yahweh in here with you, but only devotees of Baal”. 

2Ki 10:24 He then proceeded to present sacrifices and burnt offerings. Now Jehu had stationed eighty of his 
men outside, having said, “Whoëver lets one of the people go whom I am now putting within your clutches, will 
pay for it with his life”. 

2Ki 10:25 When he had finished making the burnt offering, he gave the order to the guards and equerries, “Go 
in, strike them down! Let no one out!”. The guards and equerries went in, putting everyone to the sword all the 
way to the sanctuary of Baal’s temple. 

2Ki 10:26 They took the sacred pole out of Baal’s temple and burned it. 

2Ki 10:27 They demolished Baal’s image and demolished Baal’s temple too, making it into a latrine, which it still 
is today. 

2Ki 10:28 Thus Jehu rid Israel of Baal. 

2Ki 10:29 Even so, Jehu did not give up the sins into which Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel, the golden 
calves of Bethel and Dan. 

2Ki 10:30 Yahweh said to Jehu, “Since you have done well in carrying out what pleases me, and have done 
everything I required to be done to the House of Ahab, your sons will occupy the throne of Israel down to the 
fourth generation”. 

2Ki 10:31 Jehu, however, did not faithfully and wholeheartedly follow the law of Yahweh, God of Israel; he did 



not give up the sins into which Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel. 

2Ki 10:32 At that time Yahweh began to whittle Israel down, and Hazael defeated the Israelites throughout the 
territory east of the Jordan: 

2Ki 10:33 the whole territory of Gilead - of the Gadites, the Reubenites and the Manassehites — from Aroer on 
the River Arnon: Gilead and Bashan. 

2Ki 10:34 The rest of the history of Jehu, his entire career, all his prowess, is this not recorded in the Book of 
the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 

2Ki 10:35 Then he fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in Samaria; his son Jehoahaz succeeded him. 
2Ki 10:36 Jehu’s reign over Israel in Samaria lasted twenty-eight years. 

2Ki 11:1 When Athaliah mother of Ahaziah learned that her son was dead, she promptly murdered all those of 
royal stock. 

2Ki 1 1 :2 But Jehosheba, daughter of King Jehoram and sister of Ahaziah, surreptitiously rescued Jehoash son 
of Ahaziah from among the princes who were to be murdered, and put him with his nurse in the sleeping 
quarters; in this way she hid him from Athaliah, and he was not killed. 

2Ki 11:3 He stayed, hidden with her in the Temple of Yahweh for six years, while Athaliah governed the country. 
2Ki 11:4 In the seventh year, Jehoiada sent for the regimental commanders of the Carians and the guards, and 
had them brought to him in the Temple of Yahweh. He made a pact with them, put them on oath, then showed 
them the king’s son. He gave them this order, 

2Ki 1 1 :5 “This is what you must do: a third of you who come on duty on the Sabbath must mount guard at the 
royal palace, 

2Ki 11:6 

2Ki 1 1 :7 and your two other sections who come off duty on the Sabbath and mount guard at the Temple of 
Yahweh 

2Ki 1 1 :8 must surround the king, each man with his weapons in his hand; anyone forcing his way through the 
ranks is to be killed. And you will escort the king as he leaves and as he comes in”. 

2Ki 11:9 The regimental commanders did everything as Jehoiada the priest had ordered, and each one brought 
his men, those coming on duty on the Sabbath and those going off duty on the Sabbath, and reported to 
Jehoiada the priest. 

2Ki 11:10 The priest then issued the regimental commanders with King David’s spears and shields, which were 
kept in the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 11:11 The guards then took position, each man with his weapons in his hand, from the south corner of the 
Temple to the north corner of the Temple, all round the altar and the Temple. 

2Ki 11:12 Then Jehoiada brought the king’s son out — crowned him and gave him a copy of the covenant; and 
they made him king and anointed him, and they clapped their hands and shouted, “Long live the king!”. 

2Ki 11:13 On hearing the people shouting, Athaliah joined the people in the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 11:14 When she looked, there stood the king on a dais, as the custom was, with the officers and trumpeters 
at the king’s side, and all the people of the country rejoicing and blowing the trumpets; then Athaliah tore her 
clothes and shouted, “Treason, treason!”. 

2Ki 11:15 Jehoiada the priest then gave the orders to the commanders in charge of the troops, “Take her out 
under guard and put to death anyone who follows her”. “For”, the priest had already said, “she must not be killed 
inside the Temple of Yahweh”. 

2Ki 11:16 They seized her, and when she reached the horses’ entry to the palace, she was killed there. 

2Ki 11:17 Jehoiada made a covenant between Yahweh, the king and the people that they would remain 
Yahweh’s people; and another one between the king and the people. 

2Ki 11:18 All the people of the country then went to the temple of Baal and demolished it; they smashed its 
altars and its images and killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars. The priest made arrangements for 
the security of the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 11:19 He then took the regimental commanders, the Carians, the guards and all the people of the country, 
and they escorted the king down from the Temple of Yahweh, entering the palace through the Gate of the 
Guards. Jehoash took his seat on the throne of the kings. 

2Ki 1 1 :20 All the people of the country were delighted; the city, however, made no move. And Athaliah was put 
to death inside the palace. 

2Ki 12:1 Jehoash was seven years old when he came to the throne. 

2Ki 12:2 Jehoash became king in the seventh year of Jehu, and reigned for forty years in Jerusalem. His 
mother’s name was Zibiah of Beersheba. 

2Ki 12:3 All his life Jehoash did what Yahweh regards as right, having been instructed by Jehoiada the priest. 
2Ki 12:4 The high places, however, were not abolished, and the people still offered sacrifices and incense on 
the high places. 

2Ki 12:5 Jehoash said to the priests, “All the money from the sacred revenues brought to the Temple of 



Yahweh, the money from personal taxes, and all the money voluntarily offered to the Temple- 

2Ki 12:6 the priests are to receive this individually from people of their acquaintance and will carry out all the 

repairs to the Temple which need to be made”. 

2Ki 12:7 Now in the twenty-third year of King Jehoash the priests had done no repairs to the Temple; 

2Ki 12:8 so King Jehoash summoned Jehoiada the priest and the other priests. “Why are you not repairing the 
Temple?”. he asked. “You are no longer to accept money from people of your acquaintance but are to hand it over 
for the Temple repairs”. 

2Ki 12:9 The priests agreed to accept no money from the people and no longer to be responsible for repairs to 
the Temple. 

2Ki 12:10 Jehoiada the priest took a chest, bored a hole in the lid and placed it beside the pillar, to the right of 
the entry to the Temple of Yahweh; in it the priests who guarded the threshold put all the money which was given 
for the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 12:1 1 Whenever they saw that there was a great deal of money in the chest, the king’s secretary would 
come, and they would empty it out and reckon the money then in the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 12:12 Once checked, they paid this money over to the masters of works attached to the Temple of Yahweh, 
and these in turn spent it on carpenters and builders working on the Temple of Yahweh, 

2Ki 12:13 on masons and stonecutters, and on buying timber and dressed stone to be used for repairs to the 
Temple of Yahweh; in short, for all the costs of the Temple repairs. 

2Ki 12:14 But no silver basins, knives, sprinkling bowls, trumpets or gold or silver objects were made for the 
Temple of Yahweh out of the money presented, 

2Ki 12:15 which was all given to the masters of works for repairing the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 12:16 No accounts were kept with the men to whom the money was paid over to be spent on the workmen, 
since they were honest in their work. 

2Ki 12:17 Money offered in expiation of an offence or of a sin was not given to the Temple of Yahweh; that was 
for the priests. 

2Ki 12:18 At that time Hazael king of Aram went to war against Gath, and captured it; he then prepared to attack 
Jerusalem. 

2Ki 12:19 Jehoash king of Judah took all the sacred offerings dedicated by his ancestors, the kings of Judah, 
Jehoshaphat, Jehoram and Ahaziah, with those which he himself had dedicated, and all the gold which was to 
be found in the treasuries of the Temple of Yahweh and of the palace; he sent it all to Hazael king of Aram, who 
retired from Jerusalem. 

2Ki 12:20 The rest of the history of Joash, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 12:21 His own retainers rebelled and hatched a plot; they murdered Joash in the palace of the Millo … 

2Ki 12:22 Jozacar son of Shimeath and Jehozabad son of Shomer were the retainers who struck the blows from 
which he died. He was buried with his ancestors in the City of David; his son Amaziah succeeded him. 

2Ki 13:1 In the twenty-third year of Joash son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz son of Jehu became king of 
Israel in Samaria. He reigned for seventeen years. 

2Ki 13:2 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh and copied the sin into which Jeroboam son of Nebat had led 
Israel; he did not give it up. 

2Ki 13:3 This aroused Yahweh’s anger against the Israelites, and he delivered them without respite into the 
power of Hazael king of Aram and of Ben-Hadad son of Hazael. 

2Ki 13:4 Jehoahaz, however, tried to placate Yahweh, and Yahweh heard him, for he had seen the oppression 
which the king of Aram was inflicting on Israel. 

2Ki 13:5 Yahweh gave Israel a saviour who freed them from the grip of Aram, and the Israelites lived in their 
tents as in the past. 

2Ki 13:6 But they did not give up the sin into which Jeroboam had led Israel; they persisted in it, and even the 
sacred pole stayed standing in Samaria. 

2Ki 13:7 Of Jehoahaz’s army Yahweh left only fifty horsemen, ten chariots and ten thousand foot soldiers. The 
king of Aram had destroyed them, making them like dust trampled underfoot. 

2Ki 13:8 The rest of the history of Jehoahaz, his entire career, his prowess, is this not recorded in the Book of 
the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 

2Ki 13:9 Then Jehoahaz fell asleep with his ancestors, and was buried in Samaria; his son Joash succeeded 
him. 

2Ki 13:10 In the thirty-seventh year of Joash king of Judah, Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, became king of Israel in 
Samaria. He reigned for sixteen years. 

2Ki 13:1 1 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, he did not give up the sin into which Jeroboam son of Nebat 
had led Israel; he persisted in it. 

2Ki 13:12 The rest of the history of Joash, his entire career, his prowess, how he waged war on Amaziah king of 



Judah, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 

2Ki 13:13 Then Joash fell asleep with his ancestors, and Jeroboam ascended his throne. Joash was buried in 
Samaria with the kings of Israel. 

2Ki 13:14 When Elisha had fallen ill of the illness of which he was to die, Joash king of Israel went down to him 
and shedding tears over him said, “Father! Father! Chariot of Israel and its chargers!”. 

2Ki 13:15 Elisha said to him, “Bring bow and arrows”, and he sent for a bow and arrows. 

2Ki 13:16 Then Elisha said to the king, “Draw the bow”, and he drew it. Elisha put his hands over the hands of 
the king, 

2Ki 13:17 then he said, “Open the window towards the east”, and he opened it. Then Elisha said, “Shoot!”. And he 
shot. Elisha said, “Arrow of victory over Aram! You will defeat Aram at Aphek-completely”. 

2Ki 13:18 Elisha said, Take the arrows”, and he took them. Then he said to the king, “Strike the ground”, and he 
struck it three times, then stopped. 

2Ki 13:19 At this the man of God grew angry with him. “You should have struck half a dozen times”, he said, “and 
you would have beaten Aram completely; now you will beat Aram only three times”. 

2Ki 13:20 Elisha died and was buried. Bands of Moabites were making incursions into the country every year. 
2Ki 13:21 Some people happened to be carrying a man out for burial; at the sight of one of these bands, they 
flung the man into the tomb of Elisha and made off. The man had no sooner touched the bones of Elisha than he 
came to life and stood up on his feet. 

2Ki 13:22 Flazael king of Aram had oppressed the Israelites throughout the lifetime of Jehoahaz, 

2Ki 13:23 but Yahweh was kind and took pity on them. Because of the covenant which he had made with 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, he relented towards them; he had no wish to destroy them, he did not cast them out 
of his presence. 

2Ki 13:24 Flazael king of Aram died, and his son Ben-Fladad succeeded him. 

2Ki 13:25 From Ben-Hadad son of Flazael, Jehoash son of Jehoahaz recaptured the towns which Flazael had 
seized from his father Jehoahaz by force of arms. Joash defeated him three times and recovered the Israelite 
towns. 

2Ki 14:1 In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel, Amaziah son of Joash became king of 
Judah. 

2Ki 14:2 Fie was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for twenty-nine years in 
Jerusalem. FHis mother’s name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem. 

2Ki 14:3 Fie did what Yahweh regards as right, though not like his ancestor David; he imitated his father Joash 
in all respects. 

2Ki 14:4 The high places, however, were not abolished, and the people still offered sacrifices and incense on 
the high places. 

2Ki 14:5 Once the kingdom was firmly under his control, he killed those of his retainers who had murdered the 
king his father. 

2Ki 14:6 But he did not put the murderers’ sons to death, in accordance with what is written in the Book of 
Moses, where Yahweh has commanded: “Parents may not be put to death for their children, nor children for 
parents, but each must be put to death for his own crime”. 

2Ki 14:7 It was he who slaughtered the Edomites in the Valley of Salt, ten thousand of them, and captured the 
Rock; he gave it the name Joktheel, which it bears to the present day. 

2Ki 14:8 Amaziah then sent messengers to Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel, saying, “Come and make a 
trial of strength!”. 

2Ki 14:9 Jehoash king of Israel sent back word to Amaziah king of Judah, “The thistle of Lebanon sent a 
message to the cedar of Lebanon, saying, ‘Give my son your daughter in marriage’; but a wild animal of the 
Lebanon ran over the thistle and squashed it. 

2Ki 14:10 You have conquered Edom and now aspire to even greater glory. Stay where you belong! Why 
provoke disaster, to your own and Judah’s ruin?”. 

2Ki 14:1 1 But Amaziah would not listen, so Jehoash king of Israel marched to the attack. And at Beth-Shemesh, 
which belongs to Judah, he and Amaziah king of Judah made their trial of strength. 

2Ki 14:12 Judah was defeated by Israel, and everyone fled to his tent. 

2Ki 14:13 The king of Judah, Amaziah son of Jehoash, son of Ahaziah, was taken prisoner at Beth-Shemesh by 
Jehoash king of Israel who led him off to Jerusalem, where he demolished four hundred cubits of the city wall 
between the Ephraim Gate and the Corner Gate; 

2Ki 14:14 all the gold and silver, and all the vessels to be found in the Temple of Yahweh and in the palace 
treasury, and hostages besides, he then took back with him to Samaria. 

2Ki 14:15 The rest of the history of Jehoash, his entire career, his prowess, how he waged war on Amaziah king 
of Judah, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 

2Ki 14:16 Then Joash fell asleep with his ancestors, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; his son 



Jeroboam succeeded him. 

2Ki 14:17 Amaziah son of Joash, king of Judah, lived for fifteen years after the death of Jehoash son of 
Jehoahaz, king of Israel. 

2Ki 14:18 The rest of the history of Amaziah, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of 
Judah? 

2Ki 14:19 A plot having been hatched against him in Jerusalem, he fled to Lachish; but he was followed to 
Lachish where he was murdered. 

2Ki 14:20 He was then transported by horse and buried in Jerusalem with his ancestors in the City of David. 

2Ki 14:21 All the people of Judah then chose Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in 
succession to his father Amaziah. 

2Ki 14:22 It was he who rebuilt Elath, recovering it for Judah, after the king had fallen asleep with his ancestors. 
2Ki 14:23 In the fifteenth year of Amaziah son of Joash, king of Judah, Jeroboam son of Joash became king of 
Israel in Samaria. He reigned for forty-one years. 

2Ki 14:24 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh and did not give up any of the sins into which Jeroboam son of 
Nebat had led Israel. 

2Ki 14:25 It was he who recovered the territory of Israel from the Pass of Hamath to the Sea of the Arabah, in 
accordance with the word which Yahweh, God of Israel, had spoken through his servant Jonah son of Amittai, 
the prophet from Gath-Hepher. 

2Ki 14:26 For Yahweh had seen how very bitter the affliction of Israel was, with no one, either fettered or free, to 
come to Israel’s help. 

2Ki 14:27 But Yahweh had resolved not to blot out the name of Israel under heaven; he rescued them by means 
of Jeroboam son of Joash. 

2Ki 14:28 The rest of the history of Jeroboam, his entire career, his prowess, what wars he waged, how he 
brought Damascus and Hamath back to their allegiance to Judah and Israel, is this not recorded in the Book of 
the Annals of the Kings of Israel? 

2Ki 14:29 Then Jeroboam fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; his 
son Zechariah succeeded him. 

2Ki 15:1 In the seventeenth year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Uzziah son of Amaziah became king of Judah. 

2Ki 15:2 He was sixteen years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for fifty-two years in Jerusalem. 
His mother’s name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 

2Ki 15:3 He did what Yahweh regards as right, just as his father Amaziah had done. 

2Ki 15:4 The high places, however, were not abolished, and the people still offered sacrifices and incense on 
the high places. 

2Ki 15:5 But Yahweh struck the king, and he was afflicted with a virulent skin-disease till his dying day. He lived 
confined to his room, while Jotham the king’s son, who was master of the palace, governed the country. 

2Ki 15:6 The rest of the history of Uzziah, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 15:7 Then Uzziah fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the City of David; his son Jotham then 
succeeded him. 

2Ki 15:8 In the thirty-eighth year of Uzziah king of Judah, Zechariah son of Jeroboam became king of Israel in 
Samaria for six months. 

2Ki 15:9 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, as his fathers had done; he did not give up the sins into which 
Jeroboam son of Nebat had led Israel. Shallum son of Jabesh plotted against him, murdered him at Ibleam, 

2Ki 15:10 and succeeded him. 

2Ki 15:1 1 The rest of the history of Zechariah is recorded in the Book of Annals of the Kings of Israel. 

2Ki 15:12 This was the word which Yahweh had spoken to Jehu, “Your sons will sit on the throne of Israel to the 
fourth generation”. And so it turned out. 

2Ki 15:13 Shallum son of Jabesh became king in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah and reigned for 
one month in Samaria. 

2Ki 15:14 Then Menahem son of Gadi marched from Tirzah, entered Samaria, murdered Shallum son of Jabesh 
there and succeeded him. 

2Ki 15:15 The rest of the history of Shallum, and the plot he hatched, is recorded in the Book of the Annals of 
the Kings of Israel. 

2Ki 15:16 Menahem then sacked Tappuah — killing all who were in it — and its territory from Tirzah onwards, 
because it had not opened its gates to him; he sacked the town and disembowelled all the pregnant women. 

2Ki 15:17 In the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah, Menahem son of Gadi became king of Israel. He 
reigned for ten years in Samaria. 

2Ki 15:18 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, he did not give up the sins into which Jeroboam son of Nebat 
had led Israel. In his days 



2Ki 15:19 Pul king of Assyria invaded the country. Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver in return for 
his support in strengthening his hold on the royal power. 

2Ki 15:20 Menahem levied this sum from Israel, from all the men of rank, at the rate of fifty shekels a head, to 
be given to the king of Assyria, who then withdrew and did not stay in the country. 

2Ki 15:21 The rest of the history of Menahem, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of 
the Kings of Israel? 

2Ki 15:22 Then Menahem fell asleep with his ancestors; his son Pekahiah succeeded him. 

2Ki 15:23 In the fiftieth year of Uzziah king of Judah, Pekahiah son of Menahem became king of Israel in 
Samaria. He reigned for two years. 

2Ki 15:24 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh; he did not give up the sins into which Jeroboam son of Nebat 
had led Israel. 

2Ki 15:25 Pekah son of Remaliah, his equerry, plotted against him and assassinated him in the palace keep … 
He had fifty Gileadites with him. He killed the king and succeeded him. 

2Ki 15:26 The rest of the history of Pekahiah, his entire career, is recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Israel. 

2Ki 15:27 In the fifty-second year of Uzziah king of Judah, Pekah son of Remaliah became king of Israel in 
Samaria. He reigned for twenty years. 

2Ki 15:28 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh; he did not give up the sins into which Jeroboam son of Nebat 
had led Israel. 

2Ki 15:29 In the days of Pekah king of Israel, Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria came and captured Ijon, Abel-Beth- 
Maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor, Gilead and Galilee — the whole territory of Naphtali and deported the 
population to Assyria. 

2Ki 15:30 Hoshea son of Elah hatched a plot against Pekah son of Remaliah; he murdered the king and 
succeeded him. 

2Ki 15:31 The rest of the history of Pekah, his entire career, is recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings 
of Israel. 

2Ki 15:32 In the second year of Pekah son of Remaliah, king of Israel, Jotham son of Uzziah became king of 
Judah. 

2Ki 15:33 He was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for sixteen years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerusha daughter of Zadok. 

2Ki 15:34 He did what Yahweh regards as right, just as his father Uzziah had done. 

2Ki 15:35 The high places, however, were not abolished, and the people still offered sacrifices and incense on 
the high places. It was he who built the Upper Gate of the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 1 5:36 The rest of the history of Jotham, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of 
the Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 1 5:37 At that time Yahweh began sending Razon king of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah against Judah. 
2Ki 15:38 Then Jotham fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the City of David, his ancestor; his son 
Ahaz succeeded him. 

2Ki 16:1 In the seventeenth year of Pekah son of Remaliah, Ahaz son of Jotham became king of Judah. 

2Ki 16:2 Ahaz was twenty years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. 
He did not do what Yahweh his God regards as right, as his ancestor David had done. 

2Ki 16:3 He followed the example of the kings of Israel, even causing his son to pass through the fire of 
sacrifice, also copying the disgusting practices of the nations whom Yahweh had dispossessed for the Israelites. 
2Ki 16:4 He offered sacrifices and incense on the high places, on the hills and under every luxuriant tree. 

2Ki 16:5 Then it was that Razon king of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah, king of Israel, launched their 
campaign against Jerusalem. They besieged it but could not reduce it. 

2Ki 16:6 (At that time, the king of Edom recovered Elath for Edom; he drove the Judaeans out of Elath, and the 
Edomites occupied it and have been there ever since.) 

2Ki 16:7 Ahaz then sent messengers to Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria to say, “I am your servant and your son. 
Come and rescue me from the king of Aram and the king of Israel who are making war on me”. 

2Ki 16:8 And Ahaz took what silver and gold was to be found in the Temple of Yahweh and in the palace 
treasury, and sent this as a present to the king of Assyria. 

2Ki 16:9 The king of Assyria granted his request and, marching on Damascus, captured it; he deported its 
population to Kir and put Razon to death. 

2Ki 16:10 When King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria, he saw the altar which 
was in Damascus. King Ahaz then sent a picture and model of the altar, with details of its construction, to Uriah 
the priest. 

2Ki 16:1 1 Uriah the priest constructed the altar; all the instructions sent by King Ahaz from Damascus were 
carried out by Uriah the priest before King Ahaz returned from Damascus. 



2Ki 16:12 When the king arrived from Damascus, he inspected the altar, he approached it and ascended it. 

2Ki 16:13 And on the altar he made his burnt offering and his oblation; he poured out his libation and sprinkled 
the blood of his communion sacrifices. 

2Ki 16:14 The altar which used to stand before Yahweh he removed from the front of the Temple, where it had 
stood between the new altar and the Temple of Yahweh, and placed it at the north side of the new altar. 

2Ki 16:15 King Ahaz gave this order to Uriah the priest, “In future you will present the morning burnt offering, the 
evening oblation, the king’s burnt offering and oblation, the burnt offering, the oblation and the libations of all the 
people of the country on the large altar; on it you will pour out all the blood of the burnt offerings and sacrifices. 
As regards the bronze altar, I shall see to that”. 

2Ki 16:16 Uriah the priest did everything that King Ahaz had ordered. 

2Ki 16:17 King Ahaz broke up the wheeled stands; removed the crosspieces and the basins from them, and 
took the bronze Sea off the oxen supporting it, and rested it on the stone pavement. 

2Ki 16:18 And from the Temple of Yahweh, in deference to the king of Assyria, he removed the dais for the 
throne which had been built inside, and the royal entrance on the outside. 

2Ki 16:19 The rest of the history of Ahaz, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 16:20 Then Ahaz fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the City of David; his son Hezekiah 
succeeded him. 

2Ki 17:1 In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, Hoshea son of Elah became king of Israel in Samaria, and 
reigned for nine years. 

2Ki 17:2 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, though not like the preceding kings of Israel. 

2Ki 17:3 Shalmaneser king of Assyria made war on Hoshea who submitted to him and paid him tribute. 

2Ki 17:4 But the king of Assyria discovered that Hoshea was playing a double game with him; he had sent 
messengers to Sais, to the king of Egypt, and had not, as in previous years, handed over the tribute to the king 
of Assyria. For this the king of Assyria imprisoned him in chains. 

2Ki 17:5 The king of Assyria invaded the whole country and, coming to Samaria, laid siege to it for three years. 
2Ki 17:6 In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria captured Samaria and deported the Israelites to 
Assyria. He settled them in Halah on the Habor, a river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes. 

2Ki 17:7 This happened because the Israelites had sinned against Yahweh their God who had brought them out 
of Egypt, out of the grip of Pharaoh king of Egypt. They worshipped other gods, 

2Ki 17:8 they followed the practices of the nations which Yahweh had dispossessed for them. 

2Ki 17:9 The Israelites spoke slightingly of Yahweh their God. They built themselves high places wherever they 
lived, from watchtower to fortified town. 

2Ki 17:10 They set up pillars and sacred poles for themselves on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree. 
2Ki 17:1 1 They sacrificed on all the high places like the nations which Yahweh had expelled for them, and did 
wicked things there, provoking Yahweh’s anger. 

2Ki 17:12 They served idols, although Yahweh had told them, “This you must not do”. 

2Ki 17:13 And yet through all the prophets and the seers, Yahweh had given Israel and Judah this warning, 

“Turn from your wicked ways and keep my commandments and my laws in accordance with the entire Law which 
I laid down for your fathers and delivered to them through my servants the prophets”. 

2Ki 17:14 But they would not listen, they were as stubborn as their ancestors, who had no faith in Yahweh their 
God. 

2Ki 17:15 They despised his laws and the covenant which he had made with their ancestors and the warnings 
which he had given them. Pursuing futility, they themselves became futile through copying the nations round 
them, although Yahweh had ordered them not to act as they did. 

2Ki 17:16 They rejected all the commandments of Yahweh their God and cast themselves metal idols, two 
calves; they made themselves sacred poles, they worshipped the whole array of heaven, and they served Baal. 
2Ki 17:17 They caused their sons and daughters to pass through the fire of sacrifice, also they practised 
divination and sorcery, they sold themselves to doing what displeases Yahweh, provoking his anger. 

2Ki 17:18 Because of which, Yahweh became enraged with Israel and thrust them away from him. The tribe of 
Judah was the only one left. 

2Ki 17:19 Judah did not keep the commandments of Yahweh their God either but copied the practices which 
Israel had introduced. 

2Ki 17:20 Yahweh rejected the whole race of Israel; he brought them low, delivering them into the hands of 
marauders, until at length he thrust them away from him. 

2Ki 17:21 And indeed he had torn Israel away from the House of David, and they had made Jeroboam son of 
Nebat king; Jeroboam had drawn Israel away from Yahweh and led them into a great sin. 

2Ki 17:22 The Israelites copied the sin which Jeroboam had committed; they did not give it up, 

2Ki 17:23 until at length Yahweh thrust Israel away from him, as he had foretold through all his servants the 



prophets; he deported the Israelites from their own country to Assyria, where they have been ever since. 

2Ki 17:24 The king of Assyria brought people from Babylon, Cuthah, Avva, Hamath and Sepharvaim, and 
settled them in the towns of Samaria to replace the Israelites; these took possession of Samaria and lived in its 
towns. 

2Ki 17:25 When they first came to live there, they did not worship Yahweh; hence, Yahweh set lions on them, 
which killed a number of them. 

2Ki 17:26 Consequently, the king of Assyria was informed as follows, The nations whom you deported and 
settled in the towns of Samaria do not know how to worship the local god, and he has set lions on them; and 
now these are killing them because they do not know how to worship the local god”. 

2Ki 17:27 So the king of Assyria gave this order, “Send back one of the priests whom I deported from there; let 
him go and live there and teach them how to worship the local god”. 

2Ki 17:28 Accordingly, one of the priests who had been deported from Samaria came to live in Bethel; he taught 
them how to worship Yahweh. 

2Ki 17:29 Each nationality made gods of its own and put them in the shrines on the high places built by the 
Samaritans; each nationality did this in the towns where it lived. 

2Ki 17:30 The people from Babylon had made a Succoth-Benoth, the people from Cuthah a Nergal, the people 
from Hamath an Ashima, 

2Ki 17:31 the Avvites a Nibhaz and a Tartak; while the Sepharvites caused their children to pass through the fire 
of sacrifice to Adrammelech and Anammelech, gods of Sepharvaim. 

2Ki 17:32 They worshipped Yahweh as well, and they appointed priests out of their own number for the high 
places, and these officiated in the shrines on the high places. 

2Ki 17:33 They worshipped Yahweh and served their own gods at the same time, with the rites of the countries 
from which they had been deported. 

2Ki 17:34 They still follow their old rites even now. They did not worship Yahweh and did not conform to his 
statutes or ritual, or the law or the commandments, which Yahweh had laid down for the sons of Jacob to whom 
he gave the name Israel. 

2Ki 17:35 Yahweh had made a covenant with them and had given them this command, “You are not to worship 
alien gods, you are not to bow down to them or serve them or offer them sacrifices. 

2Ki 17:36 You are to bow down and offer sacrifice only to Yahweh who brought you out of Egypt with great 
power and outstretched arm. 

2Ki 17:37 You are to observe the statutes and ritual, the law and the commandments which he has given you in 
writing and to which you are always to conform; you are not to worship alien gods. 

2Ki 17:38 Do not forget the covenant which I have made with you, and do not venerate alien gods. 

2Ki 17:39 But venerate Yahweh your God, and he will deliver you from the clutches of all your enemies”. 

2Ki 17:40 But they would not listen and still followed their old rites. 

2Ki 17:41 These nationalities, then, worshipped Yahweh and served their idols as well, as did their children; and 
their children’s children still behave today as their ancestors behaved in the past. 

2Ki 18:1 In the third year of Hoshea son of Elah, king of Israel, Hezekiah son of Ahaz became king of Judah. 

2Ki 18:2 He was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for twenty-nine years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abijah daughter of Zechariah. 

2Ki 18:3 He did what Yahweh regards as right, just as his ancestor David had done. 

2Ki 18:4 He abolished the high places, broke the pillars, cut down the sacred poles and smashed the bronze 
serpent which Moses had made; for up to that time the Israelites had offered sacrifices to it; it was called 
Nehushtan. 

2Ki 18:5 He put his trust in Yahweh, God of Israel. No king of Judah after him could be compared with him — nor 
any of those before him. 

2Ki 18:6 He was devoted to Yahweh, never turning from him, but keeping the commandments which Yahweh 
had laid down for Moses. 

2Ki 18:7 And so Yahweh was with him, and he was successful in all that he undertook. He rebelled against the 
king of Assyria and refused to serve him. 

2Ki 18:8 He beat the Philistines back to Gaza, laying their territory waste from watchtower to fortified town. 

2Ki 18:9 In the fourth year of Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah, king of Israel, 
Shalmaneser king of Assyria marched on Samaria and laid siege to it. 

2Ki 18:10 He captured it after three years. Samaria fell in the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of 
Hoshea king of Israel. 

2Ki 18:1 1 The king of Assyria deported the Israelites to Assyria and settled them in Halah on the Habor, a river 
of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes. 

2Ki 18:12 This happened because they had not obeyed the voice of Yahweh their God and had broken his 
covenant, everything that Moses servant of Yahweh had laid down. They neither listened to it nor put it into 



practice. 

2Ki 18:13 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria advanced on all the fortified 
towns of Judah and captured them. 

2Ki 18:14 Then Hezekiah king of Judah sent this message to the king of Assyria at Lachish, “I have been at 
fault. Call off the attack, and I will submit to whatever you impose on me”. The king of Assyria exacted three 
hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold from Hezekiah king of Judah, 

2Ki 18:15 and Hezekiah gave him all the silver in the Temple of Yahweh and in the palace treasury. 

2Ki 18:16 At which time, Hezekiah stripped the facing from the leaves and jambs of the doors of the Temple of 
Yahweh, which an earlier king of Judah had put on, and gave it to the king of Assyria. 

2Ki 18:17 From Lachish the king of Assyria sent the cupbearer-in-chief with a large force to King Hezekiah in 
Jerusalem. He marched on Jerusalem and, on his arrival, took up position near the conduit of the upper pool 
which is on the road to the Fuller’s Field. 

2Ki 18:18 He summoned the king. The master of the palace, Eliakim son of Hilkiah, Shebnah the secretary and 
the herald Joah son of Asaph went out to him. 

2Ki 18:19 The cupbearer-in-chief said to them, “Say to Hezekiah, ‘The great king, the king of Assyria, says this: 
What makes you so confident? 

2Ki 18:20 Do you think empty words are as good as strategy and military strength? Who are you relying on, to 
dare to rebel against me? 

2Ki 18:21 There you are, relying on that broken reed Egypt, which pricks and pierces the hand of whoëver leans 
on it. That is what Pharaoh king of Egypt is like to all who rely on him. 

2Ki 18:22 You may say to me: We rely on Yahweh our God. But have his high places and altars not been 
suppressed by Hezekiah who told Judah and Jerusalem: Here, in Jerusalem, is the altar before which you must 
worship? 

2Ki 18:23 Very well, then, make a wager with my lord the king of Assyria: I will give you two thousand horses if 
you can find horsemen to ride them. 

2Ki 18:24 How could you repel a single one of the least of my master’s soldiers? And yet you have relied on 
Egypt for chariots and horsemen. 

2Ki 18:25 And lastly, have I marched on this place to lay it waste without warrant from Yahweh? Yahweh 
himself said to me: March on this country and lay it waste’”. 

2Ki 18:26 Eliakim, Shebnah and Joah said to the cupbearer-in-chief, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, 
for we understand it; do not speak to us in the Judaean language within earshot of the people on the ramparts”. 
2Ki 18:27 But the cupbearer-in-chief said, “Do you think my lord sent me here to say these things to your master 
or to you? On the contrary, it was to the people sitting on the ramparts who, like you, are doomed to eat their 
own dung and drink their own urine”. 

2Ki 18:28 The cupbearer-in-chief then drew himself up and shouted loudly in the Judaean language, “Listen to 
the word of the great king, the king of Assyria. 

2Ki 18:29 The king says this, ‘Do not let Hezekiah delude you. He will be powerless to save you from my 
clutches. 

2Ki 18:30 Do not let Hezekiah persuade you to rely on Yahweh by saying: Yahweh is sure to save us; this city 
will not fall into the king of Assyria’s clutches. 

2Ki 18:31 Do not listen to Hezekiah, for the king of Assyria says this: Make peace with me, surrender to me, and 
every one of you will be free to eat the fruit of his own vine and of his own fig tree and to drink the water of his 
own storage-well 

2Ki 18:32 until I come and take you away to a country like your own, a land of corn and good wine, a land of 
bread and vineyards, a land of oil and honey: and so you will survive and not die. Do not listen to Hezekiah; he is 
deluding you when he says: Yahweh will save us. 

2Ki 1 8:33 Has any god of any nation been able to save his country from the king of Assyria’s clutches? 

2Ki 18:34 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim and Hena and Ivvah? 
Where are the local gods of Samaria? Did they save Samaria from my clutches? 

2Ki 18:35 Of all the local gods, which ones have saved their countries from my clutches, for Yahweh to be able 
to save Jerusalem from my clutches?’”. 

2Ki 18:36 The people, however, kept quiet and said nothing in reply, since the king had given the order, “You 
are not to answer him”. 

2Ki 18:37 The master of the palace, Eliakim son of Hilkiah, Shebnah the secretary and the herald Joah son of 
Asaph, with their clothes torn, went to Hezekiah and reported what the cupbearer-in-chief had said. 

2Ki 19:1 On hearing this, King Hezekiah tore his clothes, put on sackcloth and went to the Temple of Yahweh. 
2Ki 19:2 He sent Eliakim master of the palace, Shebnah the secretary and the elders of the priests, wearing 
sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz. 

2Ki 19:3 They said to him, “This is what Hezekiah says, ‘Today is a day of suffering, of punishment, of disgrace. 



Children come to birth, and there is no strength to bring them forth. 

2Ki 19:4 May Yahweh your God hear the words of the cupbearer-in-chief whom his master, the king of Assyria, 
has sent to insult the living God, and may Yahweh your God punish the words he has heard. Offer your prayer 
for the remnant still remaining’”. 

2Ki 19:5 King Hezekiah’s ministers went to Isaiah, 

2Ki 19:6 and Isaiah said to them, “Say to your master, ‘Yahweh says this: Do not be afraid of the words which 
you have heard or the blasphemies which the king of Assyria’s minions have uttered against me. 

2Ki 19:7 Look, I am going to put a spirit in him and, on the strength of a rumour, he will go back to his own 
country, and in that country I shall make him fall by the sword’”. 

2Ki 19:8 The cupbearer turned about and rejoined the king of Assyria, who was then attacking Libnah, as the 

cupbearer had learnt that the king had already left Lachish 

2Ki 19:9 on hearing that Tirhakah king of Cush was on his way to attack him. 

2Ki 19:10 Sennacherib again sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying, “Tell Hezekiah king of Judah this, ‘Do not 
let your God on whom you are relying deceive you with the promise: Jerusalem will not fall into the king of 
Assyria’s clutches. 

2Ki 19:1 1 You have learnt by now what the kings of Assyria have done to all the other countries, devoting them 
to destruction. Are you likely to be saved? 

2Ki 19:12 Did the gods of the nations whom my ancestors devastated save them-Gozan, Haran, Rezeph and 
the Edenites who were in Tel Basar? 

2Ki 19:13 Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, the king of Lair, of Sepharvaim, of Hena, of Ivvah?’”. 
2Ki 19:14 Hezekiah took the letter from the messengers’ hands and read it; he then went up to the Temple of 
Yahweh and spread it out before Yahweh. 

2Ki 19:15 Hezekiah said this prayer in the presence of Yahweh, “Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, enthroned on 
the winged creatures, you alone are God of all the kingdoms of the world, you made heaven and earth. 

2Ki 19:16 Give ear, Yahweh, and listen; open your eyes, Yahweh, and see! Hear the words of Sennacherib, 
who has sent to insult the living God. 

2Ki 19:17 It is true, Yahweh, that the kings of Assyria have destroyed the nations, 

2Ki 19:18 they have thrown their gods on the fire, for these were not gods but human artefacts — wood and 
stone — and hence they have destroyed them. 

2Ki 19:19 But now, Yahweh our God, save us from his clutches, I beg you, and let all the kingdoms of the world 
know that you alone are God, Yahweh”. 

2Ki 19:20 Isaiah son of Amoz then sent the following message to Hezekiah, “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘I 
have heard the prayer which you have addressed to me about Sennacherib king of Assyria’. 

2Ki 19:21 Here is the pronouncement which Yahweh has made about him: ‘She despises you, she scorns you, 
the virgin daughter of Zion; she tosses her head at you, the daughter of Jerusalem! 

2Ki 19:22 Whom have you insulted, whom have you blasphemed? Against whom raised your voice and lifted 
your haughty eyes? Against the Holy One of Israel! 

2Ki 19:23 Through your envoys you have insulted the Lord, thinking: With my many chariots I have climbed the 
mountain-tops, the utmost peaks of Lebanon. I have felled its mighty cedars, its finest cypresses, have reached 
its furthest recesses, its forest garden. 

2Ki 19:24 Yes, I have dug and drunk of foreign waters; under the soles of my feet I have dried up all Egypt’s 
rivers. 

2Ki 19:25 ‘Do you hear? Long ago I prepared this, from days of old I actually planned it, now I carry it out. You 
were to lay walled cities in heaps of ruins; 

2Ki 19:26 that was why their inhabitants, feeble of hand, were dismayed and discomfited, were weak as grass, 
were frail as plants, were like grass of housetop and meadow under the east wind. 

2Ki 19:27 But whether you stand up or you sit down, whether you go out or you come in, I know it. 

2Ki 19:28 Because you have raved against me, and your arrogance has reached my ears, I shall put a hook 
through your nostrils and a muzzle on your lips, and make you return by the road by which you came. 

2Ki 19:29 ‘And this will be the sign for you: this year will be eaten the self-sown grain, next year what sprouts in 
the fallow; but in the third year sow and reap, plant vineyards and eat their fruit. 

2Ki 19:30 The surviving remnant of the House of Judah will bring forth new roots below and fruits above; 

2Ki 19:31 for a remnant will issue from Jerusalem, and survivors from Mount Zion. Yahweh Sabaoth’s jealous 
love will accomplish this. 

2Ki 19:32 ‘This, then, is what Yahweh says about the king of Assyria: ‘He will not enter this city, will shoot no 
arrow at it, confront it with no shield, throw up no earthwork against it. 

2Ki 19:33 By the road by which he came, by that he will return; he will not enter this city, declares Yahweh. 

2Ki 19:34 I shall protect this city and save it for my sake and my servant David’s sake’”. 

2Ki 19:35 That same night the angel of Yahweh went out and struck down a hundred and eighty-five thousand 



men in the Assyrian camp. In the early morning when it was time to get up, there they lay, so many corpses. 

2Ki 19:36 Sennacherib struck camp and left; he returned home and stayed in Nineveh. 

2Ki 19:37 One day when he was worshipping in the temple of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and 
Sharezer struck him down with the sword and escaped into the territory of Ararat. His son Esarhaddon 
succeeded him. 

2Ki 20:1 About then Hezekiah fell ill and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz came and 
said to him, “Yahweh says this, ‘Put your affairs in order, for you are going to die, you will not live’”. 

2Ki 20:2 Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and addressed this prayer to Yahweh, 

2Ki 20:3 “Ah, Yahweh, remember, I beg you, that I have behaved faithfully and with sincerity of heart in your 
presence and done what you regard as right”. And Hezekiah shed many tears. 

2Ki 20:4 Isaiah had not left the middle court, before the word of Yahweh came to him, 

2Ki 20:5 “Go back and say to Hezekiah, prince of my people, ‘Yahweh, the God of your ancestor David, says 
this: I have heard your prayer and seen your tears. I shall cure you: in three days’ time you will go up to the 
Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 20:6 I shall add fifteen years to your life. I shall save you and this city from the king of Assyria’s clutches and 
defend this city for my sake and my servant David’s sake’”. 

2Ki 20:7 “Bring a fig poultice”, Isaiah said; they brought one, applied it to the ulcer, and the king recovered. 

2Ki 20:8 Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “What is the sign to tell me that Yahweh will cure me and that I shall be going 
up to the Temple of Yahweh in three days’ time?”. 

2Ki 20:9 “Here”, Isaiah replied, “is the sign from Yahweh that he will do what he has said; would you like the 
shadow to go forward ten steps, or to go back ten steps?”. 

2Ki 20:10 “It is easy for the shadow to lengthen ten steps”, Hezekiah replied. “No, I would rather the shadow 
went back ten steps”. 

2Ki 20:1 1 The prophet Isaiah then called on Yahweh, who made the shadow cast by the declining sun on the 
steps - the steps to Ahaz’s roof-room — go back ten steps. 

2Ki 20:12 At that time the king of Babylon, Merodach-Baladan son of Baladan, sent letters and a gift to 
Hezekiah, for he had heard of his illness and his recovery. 

2Ki 20:13 Hezekiah was delighted at this and showed the ambassadors his entire treasury, the silver, gold, 
spices, precious oil, his armoury too, and everything to be seen in his storehouses. There was nothing in his 
palace or in his whole domain that Hezekiah did not show them. 

2Ki 20:14 The prophet Isaiah then came to King Hezekiah and asked him, “What have these men said, and 
where have they come from?”. Hezekiah answered, “They have come from a distant country, from Babylon”. 

2Ki 20:15 Isaiah said, “What have they seen in your palace?”. “They have seen everything in my palace”, 
Hezekiah answered. “There is nothing in my storehouses that I have not shown them”. 

2Ki 20:16 Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Listen to the word of Yahweh, 

2Ki 20:17 ‘The days are coming when everything in your palace, everything that your ancestors have amassed 
until now, will be carried off to Babylon. Not a thing will be left’, Yahweh says. 

2Ki 20:18 ‘Sons sprung from you, sons fathered by you, will be abducted to be eunuchs in the palace of the 
king of Babylon’”. 

2Ki 20:19 Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “This word of Yahweh that you announce is reässuring”, for he was thinking, 
“And why not? So long as there is peace and security during my lifetime”. 

2Ki 20:20 The rest of the history of Hezekiah, all his prowess, how he constructed the pool and the conduit to 
bring water into the city, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 20:21 Then Hezekiah fell asleep with his ancestors; his son Manasseh succeeded him. 

2Ki 21 :1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for fifty-five years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hephzibah. 

2Ki 21 :2 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, copying the disgusting practices of the nations whom Yahweh 
had dispossessed for the Israelites. 

2Ki 21 :3 He rebuilt the high places which his father Hezekiah had destroyed, he set up altars to Baal and made 
a sacred pole as Ahab king of Israel had done, he worshipped the whole array of heaven and served it. 

2Ki 21 :4 He built altars in the Temple of Yahweh of which Yahweh had said, “Jerusalem is where I shall put my 
name”. 

2Ki 21:5 He built altars to the whole array of heaven in the two courts of the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 21 :6 He caused his son to pass through the fire of sacrifice, he also practised soothsaying and divination 
and set up mediums and spirit guides. He did very many more things displeasing to Yahweh, thus provoking his 
anger. 

2Ki 21:7 He had an image of Asherah carved and placed it inside the Temple of which Yahweh had said to 
David and his son Solomon, “In this Temple and in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of 
Israel, I shall put my Name for ever. 



2Ki 21 :8 Nor shall I ever again set Israel’s footsteps wandering outside the country which I gave to their 
ancestors, provided they are careful to observe all I have commanded them as laid down in the whole Law which 
my servant Moses prescribed for them”. 

2Ki 21 :9 But they would not listen, and Manasseh misled them into doing worse things than the nations whom 
Yahweh had destroyed for the Israelites. 

2Ki 21:10 Then Yahweh spoke through his servants the prophets as follows, 

2Ki 21 :1 1 “Since Manasseh king of Judah has done these shameful deeds, doing more wicked deeds than 
anything which the Amorites did before him, and has led Judah too into sin with his idols, 

2Ki 21:12 Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘Look, I shall bring such disaster on Jerusalem and Judah as will 
make the ears of all who hear of it tingle. 

2Ki 21:13 Over Jerusalem I shall stretch the same measuring line as over Samaria, the same plumb-rule as for 
the House of Ahab; I shall scour Jerusalem as someöne scours a dish and, having scoured it, turns it upside 
down. 

2Ki 21:14 I shall cast away the remnant of my heritage, delivering them into the clutches of their enemies and 
making them the prey and booty of all their enemies, 

2Ki 21:15 because they have done what is displeasing to me and have provoked my anger from the day their 
ancestors came out of Egypt until now’”. 

2Ki 21:16 Manasseh shed innocent blood, too, in such great quantity that he flooded Jerusalem from one end to 
the other, besides the sins into which he led Judah by doing what is displeasing to Yahweh. 

2Ki 21:17 The rest of the history of Manasseh, his entire career, the sins he committed, is this not recorded in 
the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 21:18 Then Manasseh fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the garden of his palace, the Garden 
of Uzza; his son Amon succeeded him. 

2Ki 21:19 Amon was twenty-two years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for two years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Meshullemeth daughter of Haruz, of Jotbah. 

2Ki 21:20 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, as Manasseh his father had done. 

2Ki 21 :21 In every respect he followed the example of his father, serving the idols which his father had served, 

and worshipping them. 

2Ki 21 :22 He abandoned Yahweh, God of his ancestors; he did not follow the way of Yahweh. 

2Ki 21 :23 Amon’s retinue plotted against the king and killed him in his own palace. 

2Ki 21:24 The people of the country, however, slaughtered all those who had plotted against King Amon and 
proclaimed his son Josiah as his successor. 

2Ki 21 :25 The rest of the history of Amon, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 21 :26 He was buried in his father’s tomb in the Garden of Uzza; his son Josiah succeeded him. 

2Ki 22:1 Josiah was eight years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for thirty-one years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jedidah daughter of Adaiah, of Bozkath. 

2Ki 22:2 He did what Yahweh regards as right, and in every respect followed the example of his ancestor David, 
not deviating from it to right or left. 

2Ki 22:3 In the eighteenth year of King Josiah, the king sent the secretary Shaphan son of Azaliah, son of 
Meshullam to the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 22:4 “Go to Hilkiah the high priest”, he told him, “and tell him to melt down the silver contributed to the 
Temple of Yahweh and collected by the guardians of the threshold from the people. 

2Ki 22:5 He is to hand it over to the masters of works attached to the Temple of Yahweh, for them to pay it over 
to men working on the Temple of Yahweh, to repair the damaged parts of the Temple: 

2Ki 22:6 to the carpenters, builders and masons, and for buying timber and dressed stone for the Temple 
repairs”. 

2Ki 22:7 The latter were not required to render account of the money handed over to them, since they were 
conscientious in their work. 

2Ki 22:8 The high priest Hilkiah said to Shaphan the secretary, “I have found the Book of the Law in the Temple 
of Yahweh”. And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, who read it. 

2Ki 22:9 Shaphan the secretary went to the king, reporting furthermore to him as follows, “Your servants have 
melted down the silver which was in the Temple and have handed it over to the masters of works attached to the 
Temple of Yahweh”. 

2Ki 22:10 Then Shaphan the secretary informed the king, “The priest Hilkiah has given me a book”; and 
Shaphan read it aloud in the king’s presence. 

2Ki 22:1 1 On hearing the words of the Book of the Law he tore his clothes. 

2Ki 22:12 Then the king gave the following order to the priest Hilkiah, Ahikam son of Shaphan, Achbor son of 
Micaiah, Shaphan the secretary and Asaiah the king’s minister: 



2Ki 22:13 “Go and consult Yahweh on behalf of me and the people about the words of the book that has been 
discovered; for Yahweh’s furious wrath has been kindled against us because our ancestors disobeyed the word 
of Yahweh by not doing what this book says they ought to have done”. 

2Ki 22:14 The priest Hilkiah, Ahikam, Achbor, Shaphan and Asaiah went to the prophetess Huldah wife of 
Shallum son of Tikvah, son of Harhas the keeper of the wardrobe; she lived in Jerusalem in the new town. They 
put the matter to her, 

2Ki 22:15 and she replied, “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘To the man who sent you to me say this: 

2Ki 22:16 Yahweh says this: I am going to bring disaster on this place and the people who live in it — all the 
words of the book read by the king of Judah. 

2Ki 22:1 7 Because they have abandoned me and sacrificed to other gods, so as to provoke my anger by their 
every action, my wrath is kindled against this place, and nothing can stop it. 

2Ki 22:18 As for the king of Judah who sent you to consult Yahweh, say this to him: As regards the words you 
have heard … 

2Ki 22:19 But since your heart has been touched and you have humbled yourself before Yahweh on hearing 
what I have decreed against this place and the people who live in it, how they will become an object of horror 
and cursing, and have torn your clothes and wept before me, I too have heard — Yahweh says this. 

2Ki 22:20 So look, when I gather you to your ancestors, you will be gathered into your grave in peace; you will 
not live to see the great disaster that I am going to bring on this place’”. They took this answer to the king. 

2Ki 23:1 The king then had all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem summoned to him, 

2Ki 23:2 and the king went up to the Temple of Yahweh with all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, priests, prophets and the whole populace, high and low. In their hearing he read out the entire 
contents of the Book of the Covenant discovered in the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 23:3 The king then, standing on the dais, bound himself by the covenant before Yahweh, to follow Yahweh, 
to keep his commandments, decrees and laws with all his heart and soul, and to carry out the terms of the 
covenant as written in this book. All the people pledged their allegiance to the covenant. 

2Ki 23:4 The king ordered Hilkiah with the priest next in rank and the guardians of the threshold to remove all 
the cult objects which had been made for Baal, Asherah and the whole array of heaven; he burnt them outside 
Jerusalem in the fields of the Kidron and had the ashes taken to Bethel. 

2Ki 23:5 He exterminated the spurious priests whom the kings of Judah had appointed and who offered sacrifice 
on the high places, in the towns of Judah and the neighbourhood of Jerusalem; also those who offered sacrifice 
to Baal, to the sun, the moon, the constellations and the whole array of heaven. 

2Ki 23:6 And from the Temple of Yahweh he took the sacred pole outside Jerusalem to the Kidron valley and in 
the Kidron valley he burnt it, reducing it to ashes and throwing its ashes on the common burial-ground. 

2Ki 23:7 He pulled down the house of the sacred male prostitutes which was in the Temple of Yahweh and 
where the women wove veils for Asherah. 

2Ki 23:8 He brought all the priests in from the towns of Judah, and from Geba to Beersheba he rendered 
unsanctified the high places where these priests had offered sacrifice. He pulled down the High Place of the 
Gates, which stood at the gate of Joshua, the governor of the city, to the left of the entry to the city. 

2Ki 23:9 The priests of the high places, however, did not officiate at the altar of Yahweh in Jerusalem, although 
they did share the unleavened bread of their brother-priests. 

2Ki 23:10 He rendered unsanctified Tophet in the Valley of Ben-Hinnom, so that no one could pass his son or 
daughter through the fire of sacrifice to Molech. 

2Ki 23:1 1 He destroyed the horses which the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun at the entrance to the 
Temple of Yahweh, near the apartment of Nathan-Melech the official, in the precincts, and he burned the solar 
chariot. 

2Ki 23:12 The king pulled down altars which the kings of Judah had built on the roof and those which Manasseh 
had built in the two courts of the Temple of Yahweh, and broke them to pieces on the spot, throwing their rubble 
into the Kidron valley. 

2Ki 23:13 The king rendered unsanctified the high places facing Jerusalem, to the south of the Mount of Olives, 
which Solomon king of Israel had built for Astarte the Sidonian abomination, for Chemosh the Moabite 
abomination, and for Milcom the Ammonite abomination. 

2Ki 23:14 He also smashed the sacred pillars, cut down the sacred poles, and covered with human bones the 
places where they had stood. 

2Ki 23:15 As for the altar which was at Bethel, the high place built by Jeroboam son of Nebat who had led Israel 
into sin, he demolished this altar and this high place as well, in the same way, breaking up its stones and 
reducing them to powder. The sacred pole he burned. 

2Ki 23:16 On looking round, Josiah saw the tombs there on the hillside; he had the bones fetched from the 
tombs and burned them on the altar. This he rendered unsanctified, in accordance with the word of Yahweh 
which the man of God had proclaimed when Jeroboam was standing by the altar at the time of the feast. On 



looking round, Josiah caught sight of the tomb of the man of God who had foretold these things. 

2Ki 23:1 7 “What is that monument I see?”. he asked. The townspeople replied, “It is the tomb of the man of God 
who came from Judah and foretold what you have done to the altar”. 

2Ki 23:18 “Let him rest”, the king said, “and let no one disturb his bones”. So they left his bones untouched, with 
the bones of the prophet who came from Samaria. 

2Ki 23:19 Josiah also destroyed all the shrines on the high places which were in the towns of Samaria and 
which the kings of Israel had built to provoke Yahweh’s anger; he treated these places exactly as he had treated 
the one at Bethel. 

2Ki 23:20 All the priests of the high places who were there he slaughtered on the altars, and on those altars 
burned human bones. Then he returned to Jerusalem. 

2Ki 23:21 The king gave this order to the whole people: “Celebrate a Passover to Yahweh your God, as 
prescribed in this Book of the Covenant”. 

2Ki 23:22 No Passover like this had ever been celebrated since the days when the judges ruled Israel, nor 
throughout the entire period of the kings of Israel and the kings of Judah. 

2Ki 23:23 The eighteenth year of King Josiah was the only time when such a Passover was celebrated in 
Yahweh’s honour in Jerusalem. 

2Ki 23:24 What is more, the spirit-guides and mediums, the household gods and idols, and all the abominations 
to be seen in the country of Judah and in Jerusalem, were swept away by Josiah to give effect to the words of 
the Law written in the book found by the priest Hilkiah in the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ki 23:25 No king before him turned to Yahweh as he did, with all his heart, all his soul, all his strength, in 
perfect loyalty to the Law of Moses; nor did any king like him arise again. 

2Ki 23:26 Yet Yahweh did not renounce the heat of his great anger which had been aroused against Judah by 
all the provocations which Manasseh had caused him. 

2Ki 23:27 Yahweh said, “I shall thrust Judah away from me too, as I have already thrust Israel; I shall cast off 
Jerusalem, this city which I have chosen, and the Temple of which I have said: My Name shall be there”. 

2Ki 23:28 The rest of the history of Josiah, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of the 
Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 23:29 In his times, Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt was advancing to meet the king of Assyria at the River 
Euphrates, and King Josiah went to intercept him; but Necho killed him at Megiddo in the first encounter. 

2Ki 23:30 His retainers carried his body from Megiddo by chariot; they brought him to Jerusalem and buried him 
in his own tomb. The people of the country then took Jehoahaz son of Josiah and anointed him, proclaiming him 
king in succession to his father. 

2Ki 23:31 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for three months in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah, of Libnah. 

2Ki 23:32 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, just as his ancestors had done. 

2Ki 23:33 Pharaoh Necho put him in chains at Riblah in Hamath, to prevent his reigning any longer in 
Jerusalem, and imposed a levy of a hundred talents of silver and ten talents of gold on the country. 

2Ki 23:34 Pharaoh Necho then made Eliakim son of Josiah king in succession to Josiah his father, and changed 
his name to Jehoiakim. Carrying off Jehoahaz, he took him to Egypt, where he died. 

2Ki 23:35 Jehoiakim paid over the silver and gold to Pharaoh, but first had to tax the people of the country 
before he could raise the sum which Pharaoh demanded: he levied the silver and gold to be paid over to 
Pharaoh Necho from each according to his means. 

2Ki 23:36 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for eleven years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zebidah daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. 

2Ki 23:37 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, just as his ancestors had done. 

2Ki 24:1 In his times, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon invaded, and Jehoiakim became his vassal for three 
years, but then rebelled against him a second time. 

2Ki 24:2 So he sent armed bands of Chaldaeans, Aramaeans, Moabites and Ammonites against him; he sent 
these against Judah to destroy it, in accordance with the word which Yahweh had spoken through his servants 
the prophets. 

2Ki 24:3 It was entirely due to Yahweh’s anger that this happened to Judah; he had resolved to thrust them 
away from him because of Manasseh’s sins and all that he had done, 

2Ki 24:4 and also because of the innocent blood which he had shed, flooding Jerusalem with innocent blood. 
Yahweh would not forgive. 

2Ki 24:5 The rest of the history of Jehoiakim, his entire career, is this not recorded in the Book of the Annals of 
the Kings of Judah? 

2Ki 24:6 Then Jehoiakim fell asleep with his ancestors; his son Jehoiachin succeeded him. 

2Ki 24:7 The king of Egypt did not leave his own country again, because the king of Babylon had conquered 
everywhere belonging to the king of Egypt, from the Torrent of Egypt to the River Euphrates. 



2Ki 24:8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for three months in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Nehushta daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. 

2Ki 24:9 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, just as his father had done. 

2Ki 24:10 At that time the troops of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon advanced on Jerusalem, and the city was 
besieged. 

2Ki 24:1 1 Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon advanced on the city and his generals laid siege to it. 

2Ki 24:12 Jehoiachin king of Judah-he, his mother, his retinue, his nobles and his officials — then surrendered to 
the king of Babylon, and the king of Babylon took them prisoner in the eighth year of his reign. 

2Ki 24:13 The latter carried off all the treasures of the Temple of Yahweh and the treasures of the palace and 
broke up all the golden furnishings which Solomon king of Israel had made for the sanctuary of Yahweh, as 
Yahweh had foretold. 

2Ki 24:14 He carried all Jerusalem off into exile, all the nobles and all the notables, ten thousand of these were 
exiled, with all the blacksmiths and metalworkers; only the poorest people in the country were left behind. 

2Ki 24:15 He deported Jehoiachin to Babylon, as also the king’s mother, his officials and the nobility of the 
country; he made them all leave Jerusalem for exile in Babylon. 

2Ki 24:16 All the men of distinction, seven thousand of them, the blacksmiths and metalworkers, one thousand 
of them, all the men capable of bearing arms, were led off into exile in Babylon by the king of Babylon. 

2Ki 24:17 The king of Babylon deposed Jehoiachin in favour of his paternal uncle Mattaniah, whose name he 
changed to Zedekiah. 

2Ki 24:18 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for eleven years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamital daughter of Jeremiah, of Libnah. 

2Ki 24:19 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, just as Jehoiakim had done. 

2Ki 24:20 It was entirely due to Yahweh’s anger that this happened to Jerusalem and Judah. It resulted in his 
casting them from his presence. Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon. 

2Ki 25:1 In the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon advanced on Jerusalem with his entire army; he pitched camp in front of the city and threw up 
earthworks round it. 

2Ki 25:2 The city lay under siege till the eleventh year of King Zedekiah. 

2Ki 25:3 In the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, when famine was raging in the city and there was 
no food for the populace, 

2Ki 25:4 a breach was made in the city wall. The king then made his escape under cover of dark, with all the 
fighting men, by way of the gate between the two walls, which is near the king’s garden — the Chaldaeans had 
surrounded the city — and made his way towards the Arabah. 

2Ki 25:5 The Chaldaean troops pursued the king and caught up with him in the Plains of Jericho, where all his 
troops deserted. 

2Ki 25:6 The Chaldaeans captured the king and took him to the king of Babylon at Riblah, who passed sentence 
on him. 

2Ki 25:7 He had Zedekiah’s sons slaughtered before his eyes, then put out Zedekiah’s eyes and, loading him 
with chains, carried him off to Babylon. 

2Ki 25:8 In the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month — it was in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon — Nebuzaradan commander of the guard, a member of the king of Babylon’s staff, entered 
Jerusalem. 

2Ki 25:9 He burned down the Temple of Yahweh, the royal palace and all the houses in Jerusalem. 

2Ki 25:10 The Chaldaean troops who accompanied the commander of the guard demolished the walls 
surrounding Jerusalem. 

2Ki 25:1 1 Nebuzaradan commander of the guard deported the remainder of the population left in the city, the 
deserters who had gone over to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the common people. 

2Ki 25:12 But the commander of the guard left some of the poor country people behind as vineyard workers and 
ploughmen. 

2Ki 25:13 The Chaldaeans broke up the bronze pillars from the Temple of Yahweh, the wheeled stands and the 
bronze Sea, which were in the Temple of Yahweh, and took the bronze away to Babylon. 

2Ki 25:14 They also took the ash containers, the scoops, the knives, the incense boats, and all the bronze 
furnishings used in worship. 

2Ki 25:15 The commander of the guard also took the censers and the sprinkling bowls, everything made of gold 
and everything made of silver. 

2Ki 25:16 As regards the two pillars, the one Sea and the wheeled stands, which Solomon of bronze in all these 
objects. 

2Ki 25:1 7 The height of one pillar was eighteen cubits, and on it stood a capital of bronze, the height of the 
capital being five cubits; round the capital were filigree and pomegranates, all in bronze. So also for the second 



pillar. 

2Ki 25:18 The commander of the guard took prisoner Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the priest next in rank, 
and the three guardians of the threshold. 

2Ki 25:19 In the city he took prisoner an official who was in command of the fighting men, five of the king’s 
personal friends who were discovered in the city, the secretary to the army commander, responsible for military 
conscription, and sixty men of distinction discovered in the city. 

2Ki 25:20 Nebuzaradan commander of the guard took these men and brought them to the king of Babylon at 
Riblah, 

2Ki 25:21 and at Riblah in the territory of Hamath the king of Babylon had them put to death. Thus Judah was 
deported from its country. 

2Ki 25:22 For the people remaining in the country of Judah whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left 
behind, he appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan as governor. 

2Ki 25:23 When the military leaders and their men all heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah as 
governor, they went to him at Mizpah: Ishmael son of Nethaniah, Johanan son of Kareah, Seraiah son of 
Tanhumeth the Netophathite, Jaazaniah the Maacathite, they and their men. 

2Ki 25:24 To them and to their men Gedaliah swore an oath. “Do not be afraid of the Chaldaeans”, he said, “stay 
in the country, serve the king of Babylon, and all will go well with you”. 

2Ki 25:25 But in the seventh month, Ishmael son of Nethaniah, son of Elishama, who was of royal descent, and 
ten men with him, came and murdered Gedaliah, as well as the Judaeans and Chaldaeans who were with him at 
Mizpah. 

2Ki 25:26 Then all the people, high and low, with the military leaders, set off and went to Egypt, being afraid of 
the Chaldaeans. 

2Ki 25:27 In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty- 
seventh day of the month, Evil-Merodach king of Babylon, in the year he came to the throne, pardoned 
Jehoiachin king of Judah and released him from prison. 

2Ki 25:28 He treated him with kindness and allotted him a seat above those of the other kings who were with 
him in Babylon. 

2Ki 25:29 So Jehoiachin laid aside his prisoner’s garb, and for the rest of his life always ate at the king’s table. 
2Ki 25:30 And his upkeep was permanently ensured by the king, day after day, for the rest of his life. 


2Ch 1:1 Solomon son of David then made himself secure over his kingdom. Yahweh his God was with him, 
making him more and more powerful. 

2Ch 1 :2 Solomon then spoke to all Israel, to the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, to the judges and 
to every leader in all Israel, the heads of families. 

2Ch 1 :3 Solomon, and the whole assembly with him, then went to the high place at Gibeon, where God’s Tent 
of Meeting was, which Moses, servant of God, had made in the desert. 

2Ch 1 :4 The ark of the covenant, however, David had brought from Kiriath-Jearim to the place which he had 
prepared for it, having pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem. 

2Ch 1 :5 The bronze altar which Bezalel son of Uri, son of Hur, had made was there, in front of Yahweh’s 
Dwelling, where Solomon and the assembly consulted him. 

2Ch 1:6 There Solomon presented a burnt offering before Yahweh on the bronze altar of the Tent of Meeting, 
making on it one thousand burnt offerings. 

2Ch 1 :7 That night God appeared to Solomon and said, “Ask what you would like me to give you”. 



2Ch 1 :8 Solomon replied to God, “You showed most faithful love to David my father, and you have made me 
king in succession to him. 

2Ch 1:9 Yahweh God, the promise you made to David my father has now been fulfilled, since you have made 
me king over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth. 

2Ch 1:10 Therefore give me wisdom and knowledge to act as leader of this people, for how otherwise could 
such a great people as yours be governed?”. 

2Ch 1:11 “Since that is what you want”, God said to Solomon, “since you have asked, not for riches, treasure, 
honour, the lives of your enemies, or even for a long life, but for wisdom and knowledge to govern my people of 
whom I have made you king, 

2Ch 1:12 therefore wisdom and knowledge are granted you. I give you riches too, and treasure, and honour 
such as no king had before you and none will have after you”. 

2Ch 1:13 So Solomon came away from the high place at Gibeon, from the Tent of Meeting, to Jerusalem and 
reigned over Israel. 

2Ch 1:14 Solomon then built up a force of chariots and cavalry; he had one thousand four hundred chariots and 
twelve thousand horses; these he kept in the chariot towns and near the king at Jerusalem. 

2Ch 1:15 In Jerusalem the king made silver and gold as common as stones, and cedar wood as plentiful as 
sycamore in the lowlands. 

2Ch 1:16 Solomon’s horses were imported from Muzur and Cilicia. The king’s dealers acquired them in Cilicia at 
the prevailing price. 

2Ch 1:17 A chariot was imported from Egypt for six hundred silver shekels and a horse from Cilicia for a 
hundred and fifty. They also supplied the Hittite and Aramaean kings, who all used them as middlemen. 

2Ch 1:18 Solomon then gave the order to build a house for the name of Yahweh and a palace in which to reign. 
2Ch 2:1 And Solomon allocated seventy thousand men to be porters and eighty thousand to quarry in the hills 
and three thousand six hundred overseers for them. 

2Ch 2:2 And Solomon sent this message to Huram king of Tyre, “Do as you did for my father David when you 
sent him cedars for him to build himself a palace to live in. 

2Ch 2:3 You see, I am building a house for the name of Yahweh my God, to acknowledge his holiness so that 
perfumed incense may be burnt before him, the loaves of permanent offering be perpetually laid out and the 
burnt offerings be made morning and evening, on the Sabbaths, New Moons and solemn festivals of Yahweh 
our God, as prescribed to Israel for ever; 

2Ch 2:4 and the house which I am building must be large, for our God is greater than all gods; 

2Ch 2:5 even so, who would not find it an impossible task to build a house for him, when the heavens and the 
heavens of the heavens cannot contain him? And who am I to build a house for him except to burn incense 
before him? 

2Ch 2:6 So now send me a man skilled at working in gold, silver, bronze, iron, scarlet, crimson and violet 
materials, and who knows the art of engraving too; he is to work with my skilled men in Judah and Jerusalem, 
whom my father David has provided. 

2Ch 2:7 Also send me cedar, juniper and algum trunks from the Lebanon, for I know that your servants know 
the art of felling timber in the Lebanon. And, my servants will work with your servants 

2Ch 2:8 in preparing a vast quantity of timber for me, since the house which I intend to build is to be of a size to 
marvel at. 

2Ch 2:9 Furthermore, for the upkeep of the woodcutters whom you employ to cut the timber, I shall provide 
twenty thousand kor of wheat, twenty thousand kor of barley, twenty thousand bat of wine and twenty thousand 
bat of oil”. 

2Ch 2:10 In a letter sent to King Solomon, Huram king of Tyre replied, “Because Yahweh loves his people he 
has made you their king!”. 

2Ch 2:1 1 Huram went on to say, “Praised be Yahweh, God of Israel, who made heaven and earth and has given 
King David a wise son, endowed with discretion and discernment, to build a house for Yahweh and a palace in 
which to reign!- 

2Ch 2:12 I am now sending you a skilled and intelligent man, Huram-Abi 

2Ch 2:13 the son of a Danite woman by a Tyrian father. He knows the arts of working in gold, silver, bronze, 
iron, stone, wood, scarlet, violet, fine linen and crimson materials, and is competent to carry out any kind of 
engraving and to execute any design which may be entrusted to him, in collaboration with your skilled men and 
those of my lord David, your father. 

2Ch 2:14 “So now let my lord send his servants the wheat, barley, oil and wine as promised 

2Ch 2:15 and we will fell all the wood you need from Lebanon, and bring it you in rafts by sea to Jaffa; and it will 

be your responsibility to transport it to Jerusalem”. 

2Ch 2:16 Solomon then took a census of all the aliens resident in Israel similar to the census which his father 
David had taken; it was found that there were a hundred and fifty-three thousand six hundred. 



2Ch 2:17 He impressed seventy thousand of them as porters, eighty thousand as quarrymen in the hills and 
three thousand six hundred as overseers to make sure the people worked. 

2Ch 3:1 Solomon then began building the house of Yahweh in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah where David his 
father had had a vision — on the site which David had prepared — on the threshing-floor of Oman the Jebusite. 
2Ch 3:2 He began building it on the second day of the second month of the fourth year of his reign. 

2Ch 3:3 These are the dimensions which Solomon fixed for the structure of the house of God: its length in 
cubits, according to the old standard, was sixty cubits and its width twenty cubits; 

2Ch 3:4 and the portico in front of the house was the full width of the house, that is, twenty cubits, and its height 
was a hundred and twenty cubits; on the inside he overlaid it with pure gold. 

2Ch 3:5 The Great Hall he lined with juniper, which he overlaid with fine gold and ornamented with palm trees 
and festoons, 

2Ch 3:6 and he decorated the hall beautifully with precious stones and with gold from Parvaim, 

2Ch 3:7 overlaying the hall, its beams and its thresholds, its walls and its doors, with gold and engraving the 
walls with great winged creatures. 

2Ch 3:8 He also made the Holy of Holies, the length of which corresponded to the width of the Great Hall, being 
twenty cubits, with a width of twenty cubits, and this he overlaid with fine gold weighing six hundred talents, 

2Ch 3:9 while the weight of the gold nails was fifty shekels. He also overlaid the upper rooms with gold. 

2Ch 3:10 In the Holy of Holies he modelled two winged creatures of wrought metal work and overlaid them with 
gold. 

2Ch 3:1 1 The total span of their wings was twenty cubits; one wing, being five cubits long, touched the wall of 
the house and the other wing, being five cubits long, touched the wing of the other winged creature; 

2Ch 3:12 while one wing of the other, five cubits long, touched the other wall of the house and the other wing, 
five cubits long, touched the wing of the other winged creature. 

2Ch 3:13 The spread of these creatures’ wings was twenty cubits. They stood in an upright position, with their 
faces towards the Hall. 

2Ch 3:14 He also made the Curtain of violet, scarlet, crimson and fine linen, working a design of winged 
creatures on it. 

2Ch 3:15 In front of the Hall he made two pillars thirty-five cubits high, and on the top of each a capital 
measuring five cubits. 

2Ch 3:16 He made festoons, in the Debir, to go at the tops of the pillars, and made a hundred pomegranates to 
go on the festoons. 

2Ch 3:17 He erected the pillars in front of the Temple, one on the right, the other on the left; the one on the right 
he called Jachin and the one on the left, Boaz. 

2Ch 4:1 He made a bronze altar, twenty cubits long, twenty cubits wide and ten cubits high. 

2Ch 4:2 He made the Sea of cast metal, ten cubits from rim to rim, circular in shape and five cubits high; a cord 
thirty cubits long gave the measurement of its girth. 

2Ch 4:3 Under it and completely encircling it were things like oxen, ten to the cubit round the entire Sea; the 
oxen were in two rows, of one and the same casting with the rest. 

2Ch 4:4 It rested on twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing west, three facing south, three facing east; on 
these, their hindquarters all turned inwards, stood the Sea. 

2Ch 4:5 It was a hand’s breadth in thickness, and its rim was shaped like the rim of a cup-lily-shaped. It could 
hold three thousand bat. 

2Ch 4:6 He made ten basins, putting five on the right and five on the left, for washing in; the things to be offered 
as burnt offerings were to be rinsed in these, but the Sea was for the priests to wash in. 

2Ch 4:7 He made the ten golden lamp-stands according to the pattern and placed them in the Hekal, five on the 
right and five on the left. 

2Ch 4:8 He made ten tables which he set up in the Hekal, five on the right and five on the left. He also made a 
hundred golden sprinkling bowls. 

2Ch 4:9 He made the court of the priests and the great court with its gates and plated the gates with bronze. 
2Ch 4:10 The Sea he placed on the right-hand side of the Temple, to the south-east. 

2Ch 4:1 1 Huram made the ash containers, the scoops and the sprinkling bowls. Thus Huram completed all the 
work done for King Solomon for the Temple of God: 

2Ch 4:12 the two pillars; the mouldings of the capitals surmounting the two pillars; the two sets of filigree to 
cover the two mouldings of the capitals surmounting the pillars; 

2Ch 4:13 the four hundred pomegranates for the two sets of filigree — two rows of pomegranates for each set of 
filigree; 

2Ch 4:14 the ten stands and the ten basins on the stands; 

2Ch 4:15 the one Sea and the twelve oxen beneath it; 

2Ch 4:16 the ash containers, scoops and forks. All these utensils made by Huram-Abi for King Solomon for the 



Temple of Yahweh were of burnished bronze. 

2Ch 4:17 The King made them by the process of sand casting, in the plain of the Jordan between Succoth and 
Zeredah. 

2Ch 4:18 There was such an enormous quantity of them that the weight of the bronze could not be calculated. 
2Ch 4:19 Solomon made all the objects designed for the Temple of God, as well as the golden altar and the 
tables for the loaves of permanent offering; 

2Ch 4:20 the lamp-stands with their lamps to burn, as prescribed, in front of the Debir, of pure gold; 

2Ch 4:21 the floral work, the lamps, the tongs, of gold (and it was pure gold); 

2Ch 4:22 the snuffers, the sprinkling bowls, incense ladles and the pans, of real gold; and the entrance to the 
Temple, the inner doors (for the Holy of Holies) and the doors of the Temple itself, that is of the Hekal, were also 
made of gold. 

2Ch 5:1 Thus all the work done by Solomon for the Temple of Yahweh was completed, and Solomon brought in 
the gifts which his father David had consecrated; and he had the silver, the gold and all the utensils put into the 
treasuries of the Temple of God. 

2Ch 5:2 Solomon then assembled the elders of Israel to Jerusalem, all the tribal chiefs, the princes of the 
families of Israel, to bring the ark of the covenant of Yahweh up from the City of David, that is, Zion. 

2Ch 5:3 All the men of Israel assembled round the king at the time of the feast, that is, in the seventh month. 
2Ch 5:4 When all the elders of Israel had arrived, the Levites took up the ark; 

2Ch 5:5 they brought up the ark and the Tent of Meeting and all the sacred utensils which were in the Tent; the 
levitical priests brought them up. 

2Ch 5:6 King Solomon and the whole assembly of Israel present with him before the ark sacrificed countless, 
innumerable sheep and oxen. 

2Ch 5:7 The priests brought the ark of the covenant of Yahweh to its place, in the Debir of the Temple, that is, in 
the Holy of Holies, under the wings of the winged creatures; 

2Ch 5:8 for they spread their wings over the place where the ark stood, forming a canopy over the ark and its 
shafts. 

2Ch 5:9 The shafts were so long, however, that the ends of the shafts of the ark could be seen in front of the 
Holy Place in front of the Debir, though they could not be seen from outside. They are still there today. 

2Ch 5:10 There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets which Moses had placed in it at Horeb, when 
Yahweh made a covenant with the Israelites when they came out of Egypt. 

2Ch 5:11 Now when the priests came out of the Holy Place — for all the priests present had sanctified 
themselves regardless of the orders to which they belonged, 

2Ch 5:12 and all the levitical singers, Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun with their sons and brothers, dressed in 
linen, were standing to the east of the altar with cymbals, lyres and harps and with them one hundred and twenty 
priests blowing the trumpets, 

2Ch 5:13 and the harmony between trumpeters and singers was such that only one melody could be heard as 
they praised and gave thanks to Yahweh — and the singing began, to the accompaniment of trumpets, cymbals 
and musical instruments, and they praised Yahweh “for he is good, for his faithful love is everlasting” — then the 
Temple was filled with the cloud of the glory of Yahweh, 

2Ch 5:14 and because of the cloud the priests could not stay and perform their duties. For the glory of Yahweh 
filled the Temple of God. 

2Ch 6:1 Then Solomon said: Yahweh has chosen to dwell in thick cloud, 

2Ch 6:2 and I have built you a princely dwelling, a residence for you for ever. 

2Ch 6:3 Then the king turned round and blessed the whole assembly of Israel, while the whole assembly of 
Israel stood. 

2Ch 6:4 He said, “Blessed be Yahweh, God of Israel, who has carried out by his hand what he promised 
verbally to my father David, when he said, 

2Ch 6:5 ‘From the day I brought my people out of Egypt I chose no city, in any of the tribes of Israel, to have a 
temple built where my name should be, nor did I choose anyone to be prince of my people Israel; 

2Ch 6:6 but I did choose Jerusalem for my name to be there, and I did choose David to rule my people Israel’. 
2Ch 6:7 My father David had set his heart on building a temple for the name of Yahweh, God of Israel, 

2Ch 6:8 but Yahweh said to my father David, ‘You have set your heart on building a temple for my name, and in 
this you have done well; 

2Ch 6:9 and yet, you are not the man to build the temple; but your son, yet to be born to you, will be the one to 
build the temple for my name’. 

2Ch 6:10 Yahweh has kept the promise which he made: I have succeeded my father David and am seated on 
the throne of Israel, as Yahweh promised; I have built the temple for the name of Yahweh, God of Israel, 

2Ch 6:1 1 and I have placed in it the ark containing the covenant of Yahweh, which he made with the Israelites”. 
2Ch 6:12 Then in the presence of the whole assembly of Israel, he stood facing the altar of Yahweh and 



stretched out his hands- 

2Ch 6:13 for Solomon had made a bronze platform, five cubits long, five cubits wide and five cubits high, which 
he had placed in the middle of the court and on which he was standing; he knelt down in front of the whole 
assembly of Israel, stretched out his hands to heaven- 

2Ch 6:14 and said, “Yahweh, God of Israel, there is no god like you in heaven or on earth, you who are loyal to 
the covenant and show faithful love to your servants as long as they walk wholeheartedly in your way. 

2Ch 6:15 You have kept it with your servant, my father David, as you promised him you would. What you 
promised verbally today you have carried out by your hand. 

2Ch 6:16 And now, Yahweh, God of Israel, keep the promise which you made to your servant David when you 
said, ‘You will never lack for a man to sit in my presence before me on the throne of Israel, provided that your 
sons are careful how they behave, following my law as you yourself have done’. 

2Ch 6:17 So now, God of Israel, let the words come true which you spoke to your servant, my father David. 

2Ch 6:18 Yet will God really live with the people on earth? Why, the heavens and the heavens of the heavens 
cannot contain you! How much less this temple built by me! 

2Ch 6:19 Even so, listen favourably to the prayer and entreaty of your servant, Yahweh my God; listen to the cry 
and to the prayer which your servant makes to you: 

2Ch 6:20 Day and night, may your eyes watch over this temple, over this place in which you have promised to 
put your name. Listen to the prayer which your servant offers in this place. 

2Ch 6:21 “Listen to the entreaties of your servant and of your people Israel; whenever they pray in this place, 
listen from the place where you reside in heaven; and when you hear, forgive. 

2Ch 6:22 “If someöne has wronged his neighbour and a curse is laid on him to make him swear here before 
your altar in this Temple, 

2Ch 6:23 then listen from heaven and do justice between your servants, paying back the guilty one by making 
him suffer for his conduct, and acquitting the upright by rewarding him as his uprightness deserves. 

2Ch 6:24 “If your people Israel are defeated by the enemy because they have sinned against you, but then 
return to you and acknowledge your name, and pray and seek your favour in this temple, 

2Ch 6:25 then listen from heaven; forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them back to the country 
which you gave to them and their ancestors. 

2Ch 6:26 “When the heavens are shut and there is no rain because they have sinned against you, if they pray in 
this place and praise your name and, having been humbled by you, desist from their sin, 

2Ch 6:27 then listen from heaven and forgive the sin of your servant and of your people Israel — for you are 
constantly showing them the good way which they must follow — and send rain on your country, which you have 
given to your people as their heritage. 

2Ch 6:28 “Should there be famine in the country, or pestilence, wind-blast or mildew, locust or caterpillar; should 
their enemy lay siege to their territory; should there be any plague or any disease; 

2Ch 6:29 whatever be the prayer or entreaty of any individual, or of all your people Israel, each being aware of 
his own affliction and pain; when he stretches out his hands towards this Temple, 

2Ch 6:30 then listen from heaven where you reside; forgive and, since you know what is in his heart, deal with 
each as his conduct deserves — for you alone know what is in the human heart- 

2Ch 6:31 so that they may revere you by following your directions, which you gave to our ancestors, throughout 
their lives on earth. 

2Ch 6:32 “Even the foreigner, not belonging to your people Israel but coming from a distant country, attracted by 
your great name, your mighty hand and outstretched arm, if he comes and prays in this Temple, 

2Ch 6:33 then listen from heaven where you reside, and grant all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the 
peoples of the earth may acknowledge your name and, like your people Israel, revere you, and know that this 
Temple, which I have built, bears your name. 

2Ch 6:34 “If your people go out to war against their enemies, on whatever mission you send them, and they pray 
to you, turning towards this city which you have chosen and towards the Temple which I have built for your 
name, 

2Ch 6:35 then listen from heaven to their prayer and their entreaty, and uphold their cause. 

2Ch 6:36 “When they sin against you — for there is no one who does not sin — and you are angry with them and 
abandon them to the enemy, and their captors carry them off to a country be it far away or near, 

2Ch 6:37 if they come to their senses in the country to which they have been taken as captives and pray to you 
once again in the country of their captivity, saying, ‘We have sinned, we have acted wrongly and wickedly’, 

2Ch 6:38 and turn back to you with all their heart and soul in the country of their captivity to which they have 
been carried away as captives, and pray, turning towards the country which you gave to their ancestors, towards 
the city you have chosen, and towards the Temple which I have built for your name, 

2Ch 6:39 then listen from heaven where you reside, hear their prayer and entreaties, uphold their cause and 
forgive your people for having sinned against you. 



2Ch 6:40 “Now, O my God, may your eyes be open and your ears attentive to prayer offered in this place. 

2Ch 6:41 And now Yahweh God, go up to your resting-place, you and your fortress, the Ark! Let your priests, 
Yahweh God, be robed in salvation, let your faithful rejoice in what is good! 

2Ch 6:42 Yahweh God, do not rebuff your Anointed - remember the faithful love of your servant David!”. 

2Ch 7:1 When Solomon had finished his prayer, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering 
and the sacrifices; and the glory of Yahweh filled the Temple. 

2Ch 7:2 The priests could not enter the Temple of Yahweh, because the glory of Yahweh filled the Temple of 
Yahweh. 

2Ch 7:3 When all the Israelites saw the fire come down and the glory of Yahweh resting on the Temple, they 
bowed down on the pavement with their faces to the earth, worshipping and praising Yahweh with “For he is 
good, for his faithful love lasts for ever!”. 

2Ch 7:4 Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before Yahweh. 

2Ch 7:5 King Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty-two thousand oxen and a hundred and twenty thousand 
sheep; and thus the king and all the people dedicated the Temple of God. 

2Ch 7:6 The priests stood in their places, as did the Levites with Yahweh’s musical instruments which King 
David had provided, to render “Give thanks to Yahweh, for his faithful love lasts for ever!”. whenever David offered 
praise to their accompaniment. Opposite them, the priests blew trumpets, while all Israel stood. 

2Ch 7:7 Solomon also consecrated the middle part of the court in front of the Temple of Yahweh; for that was 
where he presented the burnt offerings and the fatty parts of the communion sacrifices, since the bronze altar 
which Solomon had made could not hold the burnt offering, the oblation and the fatty parts. 

2Ch 7:8 And then Solomon and with him all Israel from the Pass of Hamath to the Torrent of Egypt — a very 
great assembly — celebrated the feast for seven days. 

2Ch 7:9 On the eighth day they held the assembly, for they had devoted seven days to the dedication of the 
altar and seven days to the feast. 

2Ch 7:10 On the twenty-third day of the seventh month Solomon dismissed the people to their homes, rejoicing 
and happy of heart over the goodness which Yahweh had shown to David, to Solomon and to his people Israel. 
2Ch 7:11 Thus Solomon finished the Temple of Yahweh and the royal palace, and he successfully concluded 
everything that he was of a mind to do in the Temple of Yahweh and in his own palace. 

2Ch 7:12 Then Yahweh appeared to Solomon in the night and said, “I have heard your prayer and have chosen 
this place for myself as a house of sacrifice. 

2Ch 7:13 If I shut the heavens so that there is no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the country, or if I 
send pestilence among my people, 

2Ch 7:14 if my people who bear my name humble themselves, and pray and seek my presence and turn from 
their wicked ways, then I will listen from heaven and forgive their sins and restore their country. 

2Ch 7:15 Now and for the future my eyes are open and my ears attentive to prayer offered in this place, 

2Ch 7:16 for now I have chosen and consecrated this Temple, for my name to be there for ever; my eyes and 
my heart will constantly be there. 

2Ch 7:17 And if, for your part, you walk before me as your father David did, and do everything that I have 
commanded you to do, and keep my laws and my ordinances, 

2Ch 7:18 I shall make your royal throne secure, as I covenanted with your father David when I said: You will 
never lack for a male to rule in Israel. 

2Ch 7:19 But if you turn away and forsake my laws and commandments which I have laid down for you, and go 
and serve other gods and worship them, 

2Ch 7:20 then I shall uproot them from the country which I have given them, and shall disown this Temple which 
I have consecrated for my name and make it a proverb and a byword among all the peoples. 

2Ch 7:21 And at this once-exalted Temple, everyone who passes by will be appalled, and will say, ‘Why has 
Yahweh treated this country and this Temple like this?’. 

2Ch 7:22 And the answer will be, ‘Because they deserted Yahweh, the God of their ancestors, who brought 
them out of Egypt, and adopted other gods and worshipped and served them; that is why he has brought all 
these disasters on them’”. 

2Ch 8:1 At the end of the twenty years which it took Solomon to build the Temple of Yahweh and his own 
palace, 

2Ch 8:2 and to rebuild the towns which Huram had given him and settle them with Israelites, 

2Ch 8:3 Solomon mounted an expedition against Hamath-Zobah and captured it. 

2Ch 8:4 He also fortified Tadmor in the desert and all the storage towns which he had built in Hamath. 

2Ch 8:5 He also built Upper Beth-Horon and Lower Beth-Horon as fortified towns with walls and gates and bars, 
2Ch 8:6 also Baalath and all Solomon’s storage towns, all the towns for his chariots and horses, and everything 
which Solomon was pleased to build in Jerusalem, in the Lebanon and throughout the territory under his rule. 
2Ch 8:7 All those who survived of the Hittite, Amorite, Perizzite, Hivite and Jebusite peoples, who did not belong 



to Israel- 

2Ch 8:8 those of their descendants still remaining in the country, whom the Israelites had not exterminated, 
these Solomon levied for forced labour, as is still the case today. 

2Ch 8:9 Solomon did not, however, impose forced labour on the Israelites for his work — for they were soldiers, 
his senior officers and his chariot and cavalry commanders. 

2Ch 8:10 There were two hundred and fifty of King Solomon’s officials in charge of the foremen who supervised 
the people. 

2Ch 8:1 1 Solomon moved Pharaoh’s daughter up from the City of David to the palace which he had built for her. 
“I must not be responsible”, he said, “for a woman living in the palace of David king of Israel, for these buildings to 
which the ark of Yahweh has come are sacred”. 

2Ch 8:12 Thereafter, Solomon made burnt offerings to Yahweh on the altar of Yahweh which he had built in 
front of the portico, 

2Ch 8:13 in accordance with the regular prescriptions for burnt sacrifice as commanded by Moses, on the 
Sabbaths, New Moons and the three annual feasts; the feast of Unleavened Bread, the feast of Weeks and the 
feast of Shelters. 

2Ch 8:14 Following the prescriptions of his father David, he assigned the orders of priests to their duties and the 
Levites to their tasks of praise and of assisting the priests in accordance with day-to-day requirements; as also 
the gatekeepers in their various orders to each gate — for such was the command of David, man of God. 

2Ch 8:15 Nor was there deviation on any point from the king’s command as regards the priests, the Levites or 
even the storehouses. 

2Ch 8:16 Thus, all the work was over which Solomon had put in hand when the Temple of Yahweh was founded 
until it was finished. The Temple of Yahweh was complete in every detail. 

2Ch 8:17 Solomon then mounted an expedition to Ezion-Geber and Elath on the sea-coast of Edom. 

2Ch 8:18 Huram sent him ships through his agents, as well as experienced sailors, who went to Ophir with men 
in Solomon’s service, where they took on four hundred and fifty talents of gold, which they brought back to King 
Solomon. 

2Ch 9:1 The queen of Sheba heard of Solomon’s fame and came to Jerusalem to test Solomon with difficult 
questions, with a very large retinue with camels laden with spices and an immense quantity of gold and precious 
stones. Having reached Solomon, she discussed everything that she had in mind with him, 

2Ch 9:2 and Solomon had an answer for all her questions; not one of them was too obscure for Solomon to 
answer for her. 

2Ch 9:3 When the queen of Sheba saw how wise Solomon was, the palace which he had built, 

2Ch 9:4 the food at his table, the accommodation for his officials, the organisation of his staff and the way they 
were dressed, his cupbearers and the way they were dressed, and the burnt offerings, which he made in the 
Temple of Yahweh, it left her breathless, 

2Ch 9:5 and she said to the king, “The report I heard in my own country about you and about your wisdom in 
handling your affairs was true, then! 

2Ch 9:6 Until I came and saw for myself, I did not believe the reports, but clearly I was told less than half about 
the true extent of your wisdom. You surpass what was reported to me. 

2Ch 9:7 How fortunate your people are! How fortunate your courtiers, continually in attendance on you and 
listening to your wisdom! 

2Ch 9:8 Blessed be Yahweh your God. Because your God loved Israel and meant to keep it secure for ever, he 
has made you its king to administer law and justice”. 

2Ch 9:9 And she presented the king with a hundred and twenty talents of gold and great quantities of spices 
and precious stones. There never were such spices as those which the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon. 
2Ch 9:10 Similarly, the men employed by Huram and the men employed by Solomon, who brought the gold 
from Ophir, also brought back algum wood and precious stones. 

2Ch 9:11 Of the algum wood the king made steps for the Temple of Yahweh and for the royal palace, and harps 
and lyres for the musicians, the like of which had never before been seen in Judah. 

2Ch 9:12 And King Solomon, in his turn, presented the queen of Sheba with everything that she expressed a 
wish for, besides what he gave her in exchange for what she had brought to the king. After which, she went 
home to her own country, she and her servants. 

2Ch 9:13 The weight of the gold received annually by Solomon amounted to six hundred and sixty-six talents of 
gold, 

2Ch 9:14 besides what tolls and foreign trade brought in; all the Arab kings and the provincial governors also 
brought gold and silver to Solomon. 

2Ch 9:15 King Solomon made two hundred great shields of beaten gold, six hundred shekels of beaten gold 
going into one shield; 

2Ch 9:16 also three hundred small shields of beaten gold, three hundred shekels of gold going into one shield; 



and the king put these into the House of the Forest of Lebanon. 

2Ch 9:17 The king also made a great ivory throne which he overlaid with refined gold. 

2Ch 9:18 The throne had six steps with a golden foot-rest attached to the throne, and arms on each side of the 
seat and two lions standing beside the arms, 

2Ch 9:19 and twelve lions stood on either side of the six steps. Nothing like it had ever been made in any other 
kingdom. 

2Ch 9:20 All King Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the plate in the House of the Forest of 
Lebanon was of pure gold; silver was little thought of in Solomon’s days, 

2Ch 9:21 since the king’s ships went to Tarshish with Huram’s employees, and once every three years the 
merchantmen would come back laden with gold and silver, ivory, apes and baboons. 

2Ch 9:22 For riches and for wisdom, King Solomon surpassed all kings on earth, 

2Ch 9:23 and all the kings in the world consulted Solomon to hear the wisdom which God had implanted in his 
heart, 

2Ch 9:24 and everyone would bring a present with him: objects of silver and of gold, robes, armour, spices, 
horses and mules; and this went on year after year. 

2Ch 9:25 Solomon also had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand cavalrymen; 
these he stationed in the chariot towns and near the king in Jerusalem. 

2Ch 9:26 He was overlord of all the kings from the River to the territory of the Philistines and the Egyptian 
border. 

2Ch 9:27 In Jerusalem the king made silver as common as stones, and cedar wood as plentiful as sycamore in 
the Lowlands. 

2Ch 9:28 Horses were imported for Solomon from Muzur and all the other countries too. 

2Ch 9:29 The rest of the history of Solomon, from first to last, is this not all written down in the records of 
Nathan the prophet, in the Prophecy of Ahijah of Shiloh, and in the Vision of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam 
son of Nebat? 

2Ch 9:30 Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel for forty years. 

2Ch 9:31 When Solomon fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in the City of his father David; Rehoboam 
his son succeeded him. 

2Ch 10:1 Rehoboam then went to Shechem, all Israel having come to Shechem to proclaim him king. 

2Ch 10:2 As soon as Jeroboam son of Nebat heard the news — he was in Egypt, where he had taken refuge 
from King Solomon — he returned from Egypt. 

2Ch 1 0:3 They now sent for him, so Jeroboam and all Israel came and spoke as follows to Rehoboam, 

2Ch 10:4 “Your father laid a cruel yoke on us; if you will lighten your father’s cruel slavery, that heavy yoke which 
he imposed on us, we are willing to serve you”. 

2Ch 10:5 He said to them, “Come back to me in three days’ time”. And the people went away. 

2Ch 10:6 King Rehoboam then consulted the elders, who had been in attendance on his father Solomon while 
he was alive, and said, “How do you advise me to answer this people?”. 

2Ch 1 0:7 They replied, “If you are fair to these people, pleasant to them and give them a fair reply, they will 
remain your servants for ever”. 

2Ch 10:8 But he rejected the advice given him by the elders and consulted the young men in attendance on 
him, who had grown up with him. 

2Ch 10:9 He said, “How do you advise us to answer these people who have been saying, ‘Lighten the yoke 
which your father imposed on us’?”. 

2Ch 10:10 The young men who had grown up with him replied, “This is the way to answer the people who have 
been saying, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, you must lighten it for us!’. This is the right thing to say to them, 
‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s loins! 

2Ch 10:1 1 Although my father laid a heavy yoke on you, I shall make it heavier still! My father controlled you 
with the whip, but I shall apply a spiked lash!’”. 

2Ch 10:12 On the third day, Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam in obedience to the king’s 
instructions, “Come back to me in three days’ time”. 

2Ch 10:13 And the king gave them a harsh answer. King Rehoboam, rejecting the advice of the elders, 

2Ch 10:14 spoke to them as the young men had recommended, “My father made your yoke heavy, but I shall 
add to it. My father controlled you with the whip, but I shall apply a spiked lash”. 

2Ch 10:15 Thus the king refused to listen to the people, and this was brought about by God, so that Yahweh 
might fulfil the promise which he had made through Ahijah of Shiloh to Jeroboam son of Nebat. 

2Ch 10:16 When all Israel saw that the king refused to listen to them, the people answered the king thus: What 
share have we in David? -no heritage in the son of Jesse! Each of you, to your tents, Israel! Now look to your 
own house, David! So Israel went home again. 

2Ch 10:17 Rehoboam, however, reigned over those Israelites who lived in the towns of Judah. 



2Ch 10:18 When King Rehoboam sent Adoram who was in charge of forced labour, the Israelites stoned him to 
death, while King Rehoboam managed to mount his chariot and escape to Jerusalem. 

2Ch 10:19 And Israel has remained in rebellion against the House of David from that day to this. 

2Ch 1 1:1 When Rehoboam reached Jerusalem, he mustered a hundred and eighty thousand picked warriors of 
the House of Judah and Benjamin to fight Israel and win back the kingdom for Rehoboam. 

2Ch 1 1 :2 But the word of Yahweh came to Shemaiah, man of God, 

2Ch 1 1 :3 “Say this to Rehoboam son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, 

2Ch 1 1 :4 ‘Yahweh says this: Do not go and make war on your brothers; let everyone go home, for this is my 
doing’”. They obeyed Yahweh’s command and went back instead of marching against Jeroboam. 

2Ch 1 1 :5 Rehoboam, residing in Jerusalem, fortified a number of towns for the defence of Judah. 

2Ch 1 1 :6 He built Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa, 

2Ch 1 1 :7 Beth-Zur, Soco, Adullam, 

2Ch11:8 Gath, Mareshah, Ziph, 

2Ch11:9 Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah, 

2Ch 11:10 Zorah, Aijalon, Hebron, these being the fortified towns in Judah and Benjamin. 

2Ch 11:11 He equipped these fortresses, stationing commanders in them, with supplies of food, oil and wine, 
2Ch 11:12 and shields and spears in each of these towns, making them extremely strong and thus retaining 
control of Judah and Benjamin. 

2Ch 11:13 The priests and the Levites from all over Israel left their districts to put themselves at his disposal. 
2Ch 1 1:14 The Levites, indeed, abandoned their pasture lands and their holdings and came to Judah and 
Jerusalem because Jeroboam and his sons had excluded them from the priesthood of Yahweh. 

2Ch 11:15 Jeroboam had appointed his own priests for the high places dedicated to the satyrs and calves which 
he had made. 

2Ch 11:16 And those members of all the tribes of Israel who were determined to seek Yahweh, God of Israel, 
followed those priests and Levites to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Yahweh, God of their ancestors. 

2Ch 11:17 These added strength to the kingdom of Judah and gave their support to Rehoboam son of Solomon 
for three years. For three years they remained loyal to David and Solomon. 

2Ch 11:18 Rehoboam married Mahalath daughter of Jerimoth, son of David, and of Abihail daughter of Eliab 
son of Jesse, 

2Ch 11:19 and she bore him sons: Jeush, Shemariah and Zaham. 

2Ch 1 1 :20 After her, he married Maacah daughter of Absalom, who bore him Abijah, Attai, Ziza and Shelomith. 
2Ch 1 1 :21 Rehoboam loved Maacah daughter of Absalom, more than all his other wives and concubines. He 
had in fact a total of eighteen wives and sixty concubines and fathered twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters. 
2Ch 1 1 :22 Rehoboam named Abijah son of Maacah as head, hence leader, of his brothers, with a view to 
making him king, 

2Ch 1 1 :23 and acted wisely by distributing his sons throughout the territories of Judah and Benjamin, some in 
each fortified town, where he provided plenty of food for them and found them wives. 

2Ch 12:1 When Rehoboam had consolidated the kingdom and become strong, he, and all Israel with him, 
abandoned the Law of Yahweh; 

2Ch 12:2 and thus it happened that in the fifth year of King Rehoboam, Shishak king of Egypt marched on 
Jerusalem, because they had been unfaithful to Yahweh, 

2Ch 12:3 with twelve hundred chariots and sixty thousand cavalry and countless hordes of Libyans, Sukkiim 
and Cushites who came from Egypt with him. 

2Ch 12:4 They captured the fortified towns of Judah and reached Jerusalem. 

2Ch 12:5 The prophet Shemaiah then came to Rehoboam and the generals of Judah, who had fallen back on 
Jerusalem before Shishak’s advance, and said to them, “Yahweh says this, ‘You have abandoned me and so I 
have abandoned you into Shishak’s clutches’”. 

2Ch 12:6 At this, the Israelite generals and the king humbled themselves and said, “Yahweh is just!”. 

2Ch 1 2:7 When Yahweh saw that they had humbled themselves, the word of Yahweh came to Shemaiah as 
follows, “They have humbled themselves. I shall not destroy them but shall grant them some degree of 
deliverance. My retribution will not be poured out on Jerusalem by means of Shishak; 

2Ch 12:8 they are nonetheless to become his slaves, so that they may learn the difference between serving me 
and serving kings of other countries”. 

2Ch 12:9 So Shishak king of Egypt advanced on Jerusalem and carried off the treasures of the Temple and the 
treasures of the royal palace. He took everything away, including the golden shields which Solomon had made. 
2Ch 12:10 To replace these, King Rehoboam made bronze shields, entrusting them to the commanders of the 
guard who guarded the king’s palace gate. 

2Ch 12:1 1 Whenever the king went to the Temple of Yahweh, the guards would come out carrying them, 
returning them to the guardroom afterwards. 



2Ch 12:12 Because King Rehoboam had humbled himself, the retribution of Yahweh turned away from him so 
as not to destroy him completely; and there were also some good features in Judah. 

2Ch 12:13 Thus he was able to strengthen his position in Jerusalem and continue as king; for Rehoboam was 
forty-one years old when he came to the throne and remained king for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city 
chosen by Yahweh from all the tribes of Israel to put his name there. His mother’s name was Naamah the 
Ammonite. 

2Ch 12:14 But he did wrong in not setting his heart on seeking Yahweh. 

2Ch 12:15 The history of Rehoboam, from first to last, is this not all written down in the records of Shemaiah the 
prophet and of Iddo the seer? Warfare between Rehoboam and Jeroboam went on throughout the period. 

2Ch 12:16 When Rehoboam fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in the City of David; his son Abijah 
succeeded him. 

2Ch 13:1 In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, Abijah became king of Judah 

2Ch 1 3:2 and reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Micaiah daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. 
When war broke out between Abijah and Jeroboam, 

2Ch 13:3 Abijah took the field with an army of four hundred thousand picked warriors, while Jeroboam took the 
field against him with eight hundred thousand picked warriors. 

2Ch 13:4 Abijah took position on Mount Zemaraim, in the highlands of Ephraim. “Jeroboam and all Israel”, he 
cried, “listen to me! 

2Ch 13:5 Do you not know that Yahweh, God of Israel, has given eternal sovereignty of Israel to David and his 
sons by an inviolable covenant? 

2Ch 1 3:6 Yet Jeroboam son of Nebat, the slave of Solomon son of David, rose in revolt against his master. 

2Ch 13:7 Worthless men, scoundrels, rallied to him, proving too strong for Rehoboam son of Solomon, as 
Rehoboam was then inexperienced and timid and unable to resist them. 

2Ch 13:8 And now you propose to resist Yahweh’s sovereignty as exercised by the sons of David because 
there is a great number of you and you have the golden calves that Jeroboam made you for gods! 

2Ch 13:9 Have you not driven out the priests of Yahweh, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, to make priests of 
your own like the peoples of foreign countries? Anyone who comes with a bull and seven rams to get himself 
consecrated can become priest of these gods that are no gods. 

2Ch 13:10 But for our part, our God is Yahweh, and we have not abandoned him; our priests are sons of Aaron 
who minister to Yahweh, and those who serve are Levites; 

2Ch 13:1 1 morning after morning, evening after evening, they present burnt offerings and perfumed incense to 
Yahweh, they put the bread of permanent offering on the clean table and nightly light the lamps on the golden 
lamp-stand; for we keep the decree of Yahweh our God, although you have abandoned him. 

2Ch 13:12 See how God is with us, at our head, and his priests with trumpets to sound the alarm against you! 
Israelites, do not make war on Yahweh, God of your ancestors, for you will not succeed”. 

2Ch 13:13 Now Jeroboam had sent a party round to ambush them from the rear; thus the main force confronted 
Judah and the ambush lay to their rear. 

2Ch 13:14 And when Judah looked round, they found themselves being attacked from front and rear. They 
called on Yahweh, the priests sounded the trumpets, 

2Ch 13:15 and the men of Judah raised the war cry and, as they raised the cry, God routed Jeroboam and all 
Israel before Abijah and Judah. 

2Ch 13:16 So the Israelites fled before Judah, because God had given Judah the upper hand, 

2Ch 13:17 and Abijah and his army inflicted a great slaughter on them: five hundred thousand of Israel’s picked 
men fell, killed. 

2Ch 13:18 So the Israelites were humbled on that occasion, while the Judaeans won, since they had relied on 
Yahweh, God of their ancestors. 

2Ch 13:19 Abijah pursued Jeroboam, taking from him the towns of Bethel with its dependencies, Jeshanah with 
its dependencies and Ephron with its dependencies, 

2Ch 13:20 nor did Jeroboam regain strength during Abijah’s lifetime. Eventually Yahweh struck him and he died, 
2Ch 13:21 but Abijah grew stronger than ever; he married fourteen wives and fathered twenty-two sons and 
sixteen daughters. 

2Ch 1 3:22 The rest of the history of Abijah, his conduct and his sayings, are recorded in the midrash of the 
prophet Iddo. 

2Ch 13:23 When Abijah fell asleep with his ancestors, he was buried in the City of David; his son Asa 
succeeded him. In his time the country was at peace for ten years. 

2Ch 14:1 Asa did what Yahweh his God regards as good and right. 

2Ch 14:2 He abolished the foreign altars and the high places, broke the pillars, cut down the sacred poles, 

2Ch 14:3 and urged Judah to seek Yahweh, God of their ancestors, and to observe the law and commandment. 
2Ch 14:4 Because he abolished the high places and incense altars through the towns of Judah, the kingdom 



under him was undisturbed. 

2Ch 14:5 He rebuilt the fortified towns of Judah, since the country was at peace and free of war during those 
years, because Yahweh had granted him peace. 

2Ch 14:6 “Let us rebuild these towns”, he told Judah, “let us surround them with wall and tower, with gate and 
bar while the country is still ours, for we have sought Yahweh our God and he has sought us and given us peace 
all around”. They built and prospered. 

2Ch 14:7 Asa had an army of three hundred thousand men of Judah armed with shields and spears and two 
hundred and eighty thousand men of Benjamin armed with shields and bows, all of them outstanding soldiers. 
2Ch 14:8 Zerah the Cushite took the field against them with an army a million strong and three hundred 
chariots, and penetrated to Mareshah. 

2Ch 14:9 Asa took the field against him and the battle-lines were drawn up in the Valley of Zephathah, at 
Mareshah. 

2Ch 14:10 Asa then called on Yahweh his God and said, “Yahweh, numbers and strength make no difference to 
you when you give your help. Help us, Yahweh our God, for, relying on you, we are confronting this horde in 
your name. Yahweh, you are our God. Human strength cannot prevail against you!”. 

2Ch 14:1 1 Yahweh routed the Cushites before Asa and Judah. The Cushites fled, 

2Ch 14:12 and Asa pursued them with his army as far as Gerar. So many of the Cushites fell that they were 
unable to survive. They were cut to pieces by Yahweh and his army. They carried off a great deal of booty, 

2Ch 14:13 they destroyed all the towns round Gerar — for a panic from Yahweh had seized the towns — and 
plundered all the towns since they were full of loot. 

2Ch 14:14 They also routed the cattle-owners and carried off great numbers of sheep and camels; then they 
returned to Jerusalem. 

2Ch 15:1 The spirit of God then came on Azariah son of Oded; 

2Ch 1 5:2 he went out to meet Asa and said, “Listen to me, Asa, and all you in Judah and in Benjamin: Yahweh 
will be with you so long as you are with him. If you seek him, he will let you find him; but if you desert him, he will 
desert you. 

2Ch 15:3 For a long time Israel did not have the true God or a teacher-priest or a law, 

2Ch 1 5:4 but when in their distress they turned to Yahweh, God of Israel, and sought him, he let them find him. 
2Ch 15:5 In those times there was no security for people as they went about their business, but great unrest 
affecting the inhabitants of all countries, 

2Ch 15:6 nation being crushed by nation and city by city, since God caused confusion among them by every 
kind of distress. 

2Ch 1 5:7 So be strong, do not be discouraged, for your deeds will be rewarded”. 

2Ch 15:8 When Asa heard these words and the prophecy, he took courage and removed the abominable idols 
throughout the land of Judah and Benjamin as well as from the towns which he had captured in the highlands of 
Ephraim, and repaired the altar of Yahweh which stood in front of the portico of Yahweh. 

2Ch 15:9 He summoned all Judah and Benjamin as well as those Ephraimites, Manassehites and Simeonites 
who had settled with them — for a great many people from Israel had gone over to Asa when they saw that 
Yahweh his God was with him. 

2Ch 15:10 They assembled in Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of Asa’s reign, 

2Ch 15:1 1 that day sacrificing to Yahweh seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep from the booty which 
they had brought back. 

2Ch 15:12 They then made a covenant to seek Yahweh, God of their ancestors, with all their heart and soul; 

2Ch 15:13 anyone who would not seek Yahweh, God of Israel, was to be put to death, whether high or low, man 
or woman. 

2Ch 15:14 They pledged their oath to Yahweh in ringing tones, with shouts of joy, to the sound of trumpet and 
horn; 

2Ch 15:15 all Judah rejoiced over the oath, for they had sworn it wholeheartedly, and sought him so earnestly 
that he allowed them to find him; Yahweh gave them peace all round. 

2Ch 15:16 King Asa even deprived his mother Maacah of the dignity of Great Lady for having made an 
obscenity for Asherah; Asa cut down her obscenity, smashed it and burnt it in the ravine of the Kidron. 

2Ch 15:17 Though the high places were not abolished in Israel, Asa’s heart was loyal throughout his life. 

2Ch 15:18 He deposited his father’s and his own dedicated gifts of silver, gold and sacred vessels, in the 
Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 15:19 Up to the thirty-fifth year of Asa’s reign there was no war. 

2Ch 16:1 In the thirty-sixth year of Asa’s reign, Baasha king of Israel marched on Judah and fortified Ramah to 
block the communications of Asa king of Judah. 

2Ch 16:2 Asa then took silver and gold from the treasuries of the Temple of Yahweh and the royal palace and 
sent this with the following message to Ben-Hadad king of Aram, who lived in Damascus, 



2Ch 1 6:3 “Let us make an alliance between me and you, between my father and your father! Look, I have sent 
you silver and gold. Come, break off your alliance with Baasha king of Israel, which will make him withdraw from 
me”. 

2Ch 1 6:4 Ben-Hadad listened favourably to King Asa and sent the generals of his armies to attack the towns of 
Israel; he ravaged Ijon, Dan, Abel-Maim and all the storage towns of Naphtali. 

2Ch 16:5 When Baasha heard this he gave up fortifying Ramah, abandoning this work. 

2Ch 1 6:6 King Asa then had all Judah carry away the stones and timber with which Baasha had been fortifying 

Ramah, and used them to fortify Geba and Mizpah. 

2Ch 16:7 Then it was that Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah and said, “Because you relied on the king 
of Aram and not on Yahweh your God, the king of Aram’s army will slip through your fingers. 

2Ch 1 6:8 Did not the Cushites and Libyans form a vast army with great numbers of chariots and cavalry? Even 
so, because you relied on Yahweh, he gave you the upper hand; 

2Ch 16:9 for Yahweh’s eyes rove to and fro across the whole world to support those whose hearts are loyal to 
him. You have acted like a fool in this respect; hence, from now on you will have wars”. 

2Ch 16:10 Enraged with the seer, Asa had him put in the stocks in prison, being angry with him over this; at the 

same time Asa ill-treated some of the people too. 

2Ch 16:1 1 The history of Asa, from first to last, is recorded in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. 

2Ch 16:12 In the thirty-ninth year of his reign, Asa contracted a disease in his feet, which became very severe; 
in his illness, however, he consulted not Yahweh but the doctors. 

2Ch 16:13 Asa then fell asleep with his ancestors, dying in the forty-first year of his reign. 

2Ch 16:14 He was buried in the tomb which he had ordered to be cut for him in the City of David. He was laid in 
the burial chamber which was filled with perfume blended from all sorts of oils, and a very great funeral fire was 
made for him. 

2Ch 17:1 When his son Jehoshaphat succeeded him, he made himself stronger against Israel 

2Ch 17:2 by stationing troops in all the fortified towns in Judah and by garrisoning Judah and the towns of 

Ephraim which his father Asa had captured. 

2Ch 17:3 Yahweh was with Jehoshaphat because he followed the example of his father’s earlier days and did 
not have recourse to Baal, 

2Ch 17:4 but sought Yahweh, the God of his father, following his commandments and not behaving as Israel 
did. 

2Ch 17:5 Because of this, Yahweh put him in secure control of the kingdom, while all Judah gave Jehoshaphat 
presents until ample riches and honour were his. 

2Ch 17:6 He was so enthusiastic about obeying Yahweh that once again he abolished the high places and 
sacred poles in Judah. 

2Ch 17:7 In the third year of his reign he sent his leading men-Ben-Hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel and 
Micaiah, to give instruction in the towns of Judah. 

2Ch 17:8 With them went the Levites: Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, 
Adonijah and Tobijah, the Levites; Elishama and Jehoram the priests went with them. 

2Ch 17:9 They gave instruction in Judah, having with them the book of the Law of Yahweh, and went round all 
the towns of Judah instructing the people. 

2Ch 17:10 A panic from Yahweh seized all the kings of the countries surrounding Judah, as a result of which 
they did not make war on Jehoshaphat. 

2Ch 17:1 1 Some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents and a load of silver and the Arabs brought him 
seven thousand seven hundred rams and seven thousand seven hundred he-goats. 

2Ch 17:12 Jehoshaphat became more and more powerful. He built fortresses and storage towns in Judah. 

2Ch 17:13 He accumulated ample supplies in the towns of Judah. He also had warriors, outstanding men, in 
Jerusalem. 

2Ch 17:14 According to family, this is how they were classified: Over the commanders of the thousands of 
Judah was General Adnah, who had three hundred thousand outstanding men; 

2Ch 17:15 Under him was General Jehohanan, who had two hundred and eighty thousand; 

2Ch 17:16 Under him was Amasiah son of Zichri, who had volunteered for Yahweh and who had two hundred 
thousand outstanding men; 

2Ch 17:17 That outstanding soldier, Eliada, represented Benjamin, and he had two hundred thousand men 
armed with bow and shield; 

2Ch 17:18 And under him Jehozabad, who had one hundred and eighty thousand equipped for war. 

2Ch 17:19 These were in attendance on the king, apart from those whom the king had stationed in the fortified 
towns all over Judah. 

2Ch 18:1 Although Jehoshaphat enjoyed great wealth and honour, he allied himself by marriage to Ahab. 

2Ch 1 8:2 After some years he paid a visit to Ahab in Samaria. Ahab slaughtered an immense number of sheep 



and oxen for him and his retinue, to induce him to attack Ramoth-Gilead. 

2Ch 18:3 Ahab king of Israel then said to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, “Will you come with me to Ramoth- 
Gilead?”. He replied, “I will share in battle with you, my men with yours”. 

2Ch 18:4 Jehoshaphat, however, said to the king of Israel, “First, please consult the word of Yahweh”. 

2Ch 18:5 So the king of Israel called the prophets together, four hundred of them. “Should we go and attack 
Ramoth-Gilead”, he asked, “or should I hold back?”. “March”, they replied, “for God will deliver it into the king’s 
power”. 

2Ch 18:6 Jehoshaphat, however, said, “Is there no other prophet of Yahweh here, for us to consult?”. 

2Ch 18:7 The king of Israel answered Jehoshaphat, “There is one more man through whom we can consult 
Yahweh, but I hate him because he never has a favourable prophecy for me, always unfavourable ones; he is 
Micaiah son of Imlah”. “The king should not say such things”, said Jehoshaphat. 

2Ch 18:8 The king of Israel then summoned a court official and said, “Bring Micaiah son of Imlah immediately”. 
2Ch 1 8:9 The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, wearing their robes; 
in an open space just outside the gate of Samaria, with all the prophets prophesying before them, 

2Ch 18:10 Zedekiah son of Chenaanah, who had made himself some iron horns, said, “Yahweh says, ‘With 
horns like these, you will gore the Aramaeans till you make an end of them’”. 

2Ch 18:1 1 And all the prophets prophesied in the same vein, saying, “March on Ramoth-Gilead! Success is 
sure, for Yahweh has already given it to the king!”. 

2Ch 18:12 The messenger who had gone to summon Micaiah said to him, “Look! What the prophets are saying 
is uniformly favourable to the king. So I hope you will say the same as they do and speak favourably”. 

2Ch 18:13 Micaiah said, “As Yahweh lives, I shall speak exactly as Yahweh tells me!”. 

2Ch 18:14 When he came to the king, the king said, “Micaiah, should we march to attack Ramoth-Gilead, or 
should I hold back?”. He replied, “Go and conquer, Yahweh will deliver them into your power!”. 

2Ch 18:15 The king went on, “How often must I put you on oath to tell me nothing but the truth in the name of 
Yahweh?”. 

2Ch 18:16 Then he spoke out. I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains like sheep without a shepherd. And 
Yahweh said, “These have no master, let them all go peacefully home!”. 

2Ch 18:17 At this the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not tell you that he never gives me favourable 
prophecies, but only unfavourable ones?”. 

2Ch 18:18 Micaiah went on, “Now listen to the word of Yahweh. I saw Yahweh seated on his throne with the 
whole array of heaven standing on his right and on his left. 

2Ch 18:19 Yahweh said, ‘Who will entice Ahab king of Israel into marching to his death at Ramoth-Gilead?’. At 
which some answered one way, and some another. 

2Ch 18:20 A spirit then came forward and stood before Yahweh and said, ‘I will entice him’. ‘How?’. Yahweh 
asked. 

2Ch 18:21 He replied, ‘I shall go and be a deceptive spirit in the mouths of all his prophets’. Yahweh said, ‘You 
will succeed in enticing him. Go and do it’. 

2Ch 18:22 And now, you see, Yahweh has put a deceptive spirit into the mouths of your prophets here, for in 
fact Yahweh has pronounced disaster on you”. 

2Ch 18:23 Zedekiah son of Chenaanah then came up, struck Micaiah on the cheek and said, “Which way did 
Yahweh’s spirit leave me, to speak to you?”. 

2Ch 18:24 “That is what you will find out”, Micaiah retorted, “the day you go from room to room, trying to hide”. 

2Ch 1 8:25 The king of Israel said, “Seize Micaiah and hand him over to Amon governor of the city, and Joash 

the king’s son, 

2Ch 18:26 and say, ‘These are the king’s orders: Put this man in prison and feed him on nothing but bread and 
water until I am safely home’”. 

2Ch 1 8:27 Micaiah said, “If you ever do get home safely, Yahweh has not spoken through me”. 

2Ch 18:28 The king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah marched on Ramoth-Gilead. 

2Ch 1 8:29 The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I shall disguise myself to go into battle, but you put on your 

robes”. So the king of Israel disguised himself, and they went into battle. 

2Ch 18:30 Now, the king of Aram had given his chariot commanders the following order, “Do not attack anyone 
of whatever rank, except the king of Israel”. 

2Ch 18:31 So, when the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they thought, “That is the king of Israel”, and 
surrounded him to attack. But when Jehoshaphat shouted his war cry, Yahweh came to his help, God drew them 
away from him, 

2Ch 1 8:32 for the chariot commanders, realising that he was not the king of Israel, broke off their pursuit. 

2Ch 18:33 Someöne, however, drawing his bow without any special aim, shot the king of Israel between the 
joints of his armour. “T urn about!”. he said to his charioteer. “Get me out of the fighting; I am collapsing”. 

2Ch 18:34 But the battle grew fiercer as the day went on, and the king of Israel had to be held upright in his 



chariot facing the Aramaeans until the evening, and at sunset he died. 

2Ch 19:1 Jehoshaphat king of Judah returned home safely, however, to Jerusalem. 

2Ch 1 9:2 Jehu son of Hanani the seer went to meet him and said to King Jehoshaphat, “Should a man give help 
to the wicked? Should you love those who hate Yahweh and so bring his retribution on yourself? 

2Ch 19:3 All the same, there are good things to your credit, since you have removed the sacred poles from the 
country and have set your heart on seeking God”. 

2Ch 19:4 Jehoshaphat resided in Jerusalem but regularly went on progress among the people, from Beersheba 
to the highlands of Ephraim, to convert them to Yahweh, God of their ancestors. 

2Ch 1 9:5 He also appointed judges in the country in every one of the fortified towns of Judah, 

2Ch 1 9:6 saying to the judges, “Be careful what you do, since you are judging not by any human power but in 
the name of Yahweh, who will be with you when you pronounce sentence. 

2Ch 1 9:7 This being so, let fear of Yahweh govern you; be careful what you do, for Yahweh our God will not 
tolerate malpractice, partiality or the taking of bribes”. 

2Ch 19:8 Jehoshaphat also appointed some of the Levites, priests and heads of Israelite families in Jerusalem 
to settle disputes. They lived in Jerusalem 

2Ch 19:9 and Jehoshaphat gave them the following charge: “In fear of Yahweh and with conscientious integrity, 
this is how you are to act: 

2Ch 19:10 whatever case your brothers living in other towns refer to you, whether involving blood feuds or law 
and commandment, statutes and judgements, you are to instruct them in such manner that they do not incur guilt 
before Yahweh and that you and your brothers do not incur his anger. If you act thus, you will not incur guilt. 

2Ch 19:1 1 Amariah the chief priest himself will be your president in all religious cases, and Zebadiah son of 
Ishmael, leader of the House of Judah, in all civil ones, while the Levites will act as officers of the court. Be firm, 
put this into practice and may Yahweh protect the right!”. 

2Ch 20:1 Some time later, the Moabites and Ammonites, and with them the Meunites, advanced to war against 
Jehoshaphat. 

2Ch 20:2 Jehoshaphat received the following intelligence, “A vast horde is advancing on you from the other side 
of the Sea, from Edom; they are already at Hazazon-Tamar, that is, En-Gedi”. 

2Ch 20:3 Jehoshaphat was alarmed and resolved to have recourse to Yahweh; he proclaimed a fast throughout 
all Judah. 

2Ch 20:4 So Judah assembled to seek help from Yahweh; to seek Yahweh they came from every town in 
Judah. 

2Ch 20:5 Then, standing in the Temple of Yahweh in front of the new court among the assembled people of 
Judah and Jerusalem, Jehoshaphat 

2Ch 20:6 said, “Yahweh, God of our ancestors, are you not God in heaven, and do you not rule all the kingdoms 
of the nations? Your power and might are such that no one can resist you. 

2Ch 20:7 Did not you, our God, dispossess the inhabitants of this country for your people Israel and give it to 
the descendants of Abraham, your friend, for ever? 

2Ch 20:8 They have lived in it and built you a sanctuary there for your name, 

2Ch 20:9 saying, ‘If disaster, war, flood, pestilence or famine befall us, and we stand in front of this Temple, 
before you — for your name is in this Temple — and cry to you in our distress, then you will listen and rescue us’. 
2Ch 20:10 “Now see, the Ammonites and Moabites and the people of Mount Seir, whom you would not allow 
Israel to invade when they came out of Egypt — on the contrary, Israel avoided them, and did not destroy them- 
2Ch 20:1 1 see how they reward us, by coming to drive us out of your possession which you allotted to us! 

2Ch 20:12 Our God, will you not pass sentence on them, since we are helpless against this vast horde about to 
attack us? Because we do not know what to do, we look to you”. 

2Ch 20:13 All Judah, including their families, wives and children, were standing before Yahweh, 

2Ch 20:14 when, in the middle of the assembly, the spirit of Yahweh came on Jahaziel son of Zechariah, son of 
Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of Mattaniah the Levite, a member of the clan of Asaph, 

2Ch 20:15 who then cried, “Listen, all Judah and you citizens of Jerusalem, and you, King Jehoshaphat! 

Yahweh says this to you, ‘Do not be afraid, do not be daunted by this vast horde, for the war is not your affair but 
God’s. 

2Ch 20:16 Go down against them tomorrow; they are coming up by the Slope of Ziz and you will encounter 
them at the end of the ravine near the desert of Jeruel. 

2Ch 20:17 You will not need to fight in this battle. Take up your position, stand firm, and see what salvation 
Yahweh has in store for you. Judah and Jerusalem, be fearless, be dauntless; march out against them tomorrow 
and Yahweh will be with you’”. 

2Ch 20:18 Jehoshaphat bowed his head, his face to the ground, and all Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem fell 
down before Yahweh to worship Yahweh. 

2Ch 20:19 Then the Levites — both the Kohathites and Korahites — stood up to praise Yahweh, God of Israel, at 



the top of their voices. 

2Ch 20:20 Early next morning they prepared to set out for the desert of Tekoa. As they were setting out, 
Jehoshaphat stood up and said, “Listen to me, Judah and you citizens of Jerusalem! Believe in Yahweh your 
God and you will be secure; believe in his prophets and you will be successful”. 

2Ch 20:21 Then, having conferred with the people, he appointed singers who were to praise Yahweh and go out 
ahead of the army in sacred vestments, singing Praise Yahweh, for his faithful love endures for ever! 

2Ch 20:22 The moment they began their shouts of praise, Yahweh sprang an ambush on the Ammonites, 
Moabites and the people of Mount Seir who were invading Judah, and that was the end of them, 

2Ch 20:23 for the Ammonites and Moabites turned on the people of Mount Seir, and put them under the curse 
of destruction and then, having finished off the people of Seir, set to work slaughtering one another. 

2Ch 20:24 When Judah reached the point overlooking the desert and looked towards the horde, there were 
nothing but corpses lying on the ground; no one escaped. 

2Ch 20:25 When Jehoshaphat arrived to take the booty, they found quantities of cattle and innumerable 
possessions, clothes and valuables, which they seized for themselves; it was impossible to carry it, and it took 
them three days to collect it. 

2Ch 20:26 On the fourth day they assembled in the Valley of Beracah, where they blessed Yahweh — hence the 
place was given the name Valley of Beracah, which it still has today. 

2Ch 20:27 Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem returned joyfully to Jerusalem with Jehoshaphat at their 
head as Yahweh had given them cause to rejoice over their enemies. 

2Ch 20:28 To the sound of lyre, harp and trumpet they came to Jerusalem, to the Temple of Yahweh, 

2Ch 20:29 and a panic from Yahweh seized all the neighbouring kings when they heard how Yahweh had 
fought against the enemies of Israel. 

2Ch 20:30 And henceforth Jehoshaphat’s reign was undisturbed, for his God gave him peace all round. 

2Ch 20:31 So Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he came to the throne and he 
reigned for twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Azubah daughter of Shilhi. 

2Ch 20:32 He followed the example of his father Asa undeviatingly, doing what Yahweh regards as right. 

2Ch 20:33 The high places, however, were not abolished; the people had still not set their hearts on the God of 
their ancestors. 

2Ch 20:34 The rest of the history of Jehoshaphat, from first to last, is written down in the records of Jehu son of 
Hanani, which are quoted in the Book of the Kings of Israel. 

2Ch 20:35 Afterwards, Jehoshaphat formed a partnership with Ahaziah king of Israel, which was very wrong of 
him. 

2Ch 20:36 He joined him in building some ships to go to Tarshish; they built them at Ezion-Geber. 

2Ch 20:37 Eliezer son of Dodavahu of Mareshah then prophesied against Jehoshaphat as follows, “Because 
you have become Ahaziah’s partner, Yahweh has wrecked your efforts”. The ships were wrecked and were 
never fit to sail for Tarshish. 

2Ch 21:1 Then Jehoshaphat fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried with them in the city of David; his son 
Jehoram succeeded him. 

2Ch 21:2 Jehoram’s brothers, sons of Jehoshaphat, were Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariahu, Michael and 
Shephatiah — all of them sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 

2Ch 21 :3 Their father had lavishly given them presents of silver, gold and other valuables as well as fortified 
towns in Judah; but the throne he bequeathed to Jehoram since he was the first-born. 

2Ch 21 :4 Jehoram, having taken control of his father’s kingdom and secured his own position, put all his 
brothers to the sword and some officials of Israel too. 

2Ch 21 :5 Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for eight years in 
Jerusalem. 

2Ch 21 :6 He followed the example of the kings of Israel as the House of Ahab were doing, he having married 
one of Ahab’s daughters; and he did what is displeasing to Yahweh. 

2Ch 21 :7 But Yahweh would not destroy the House of David, because of the covenant which he had made with 
David, promising to provide him and his sons with a lamp for ever. 

2Ch 21 :8 In his time Edom threw off the domination of Judah and set up a king for itself. 

2Ch 21 :9 Jehoram crossed the frontier, and with him his commanders and all his chariots. Under cover of dark, 
he and his chariot commanders broke through the Edomites surrounding him. 

2Ch 21:10 Thus Edom threw off the domination of Judah and has remained free to the present day. Libnah 
revolted against him at the same time, because he had abandoned Yahweh, God of his ancestors. 

2Ch 21:1 1 What is more, he set up high places in the highlands of Judah, leading the citizens of Jerusalem and 
the people of Judah into apostasy. 

2Ch 21:12 Something written by the prophet Elijah then came into his hands. It said, “Yahweh, God of your 
ancestor David, says this, ‘Since you have not followed the example of your father Jehoshaphat or of Asa king 



of Judah, 

2Ch 21:13 but have followed the example of the kings of Israel and have led Judah and the citizens of 
Jerusalem into apostasy, just as the House of Ahab has led Israel into apostasy, and have even murdered your 
brothers, your own family, who were better men than you, 

2Ch 21:14 Yahweh is going to afflict your people, your sons, your wives and all your property with a great 
calamity, 

2Ch 21:15 and you yourself with a severe disease affecting your bowels, as a result of which disease, 
continuing day after day, you will suffer protrusion of your bowels’”. 

2Ch 21:16 Yahweh then roused the hostility of the Philistines and of the Arabs living near the Cushites against 
Jehoram. 

2Ch 21:17 They invaded Judah, forcing their way into it and carrying off all the property to be found in the king’s 
palace, as well as his sons and his wives, so that he was left no sons at all except his youngest son Jehoahaz. 
2Ch 21:18 And after all this, Yahweh afflicted him with an incurable disease of the bowels; 

2Ch 21:19 in due time, after about two years, his bowels protruded as a result of his disease and he died in 
acute pain. His people did not make a funeral pyre for him, as they had for his ancestors. 

2Ch 21 :20 He was thirty-two years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem. 
He passed away unlamented and was buried in the City of David, though not in the tombs of the kings. 

2Ch 22:1 The inhabitants of Jerusalem then made his youngest son Ahaziah king in succession to him, since 
the marauders who had attacked the camp with the Arabs had killed all the older ones. That was why Ahaziah 
son of Jehoram, king of Judah became king. 

2Ch 22:2 Ahaziah was forty-two years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for one year in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah, descendant of Omri. 

2Ch 22:3 He too followed the example of the House of Ahab, for his mother being his adviser brought about his 
condemnation. 

2Ch 22:4 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh as the House of Ahab did, for they were his advisers after his 
father’s death, to his undoing. 

2Ch 22:5 He followed their advice and went with Jehoram son of Ahab, king of Israel, to make war on Hazael 
king of Aram at Ramoth-Gilead. But the Aramaeans wounded Jehoram, 

2Ch 22:6 who returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds which he had received at Ramoth, fighting against 
Hazael king of Aram. Ahaziah son of Jehoram, king of Judah, went down to Jezreel to visit Jehoram son of Ahab 
because he was ailing. 

2Ch 22:7 Through this visit to Jehoram God brought ruin on Ahaziah. On his arrival he went out with Jehoram to 
meet Jehu son of Nimshi whom Yahweh had anointed to make an end of the House of Ahab. 

2Ch 22:8 While Jehu was executing sentence on the House of Ahab and came across the officers of Judah and 
Ahaziah’s nephews who were in attendance on Ahaziah, he killed them, 

2Ch 22:9 and then went in search of Ahaziah. The latter was captured while hiding in Samaria, and taken to 
Jehu who put him to death. But they gave him burial because, they said, “He was the grandson of Jehoshaphat 
who sought Yahweh with all his heart”. As a result, there was no member of Ahaziah’s family left who was strong 
enough to rule the kingdom. 

2Ch 22:10 When Athaliah mother of Ahaziah learned that her son was dead, she promptly did away with all the 
royal stock of the House of Judah. 

2Ch 22:1 1 But Jehosheba the king’s daughter, surreptitiously rescued Joash son of Ahaziah from among the 
chiefs who were to be murdered, and put him with his nurse in the sleeping quarters; in this way Jehosheba 
daughter of King Joram and wife of Jehoiada the priest — she was the sister of Ahaziah — hid him from Athaliah, 
and he was not put to death. 

2Ch 22:12 He stayed hidden with them in the Temple of God for six years while Athaliah governed the country. 
2Ch 23:1 In the seventh year Jehoiada decided to take action and made a pact with the regimental 
commanders, Azariah son of Jeroham, Ishmael son of Jehohanan, Azariah son of Obed, Maaseiah son of 
Adaiah and Elishaphat son of Zichri. 

2Ch 23:2 These went all over Judah, gathering the Levites from all the towns of Judah, and the heads of the 
Israelite families, who then came to Jerusalem, 

2Ch 23:3 and the whole assembly made a pact with the king in the Temple of God. Jehoiada said to them, 

“Look, the king’s son is now to be king, as Yahweh has promised of the sons of David! 

2Ch 23:4 This is what you must do: a third of you priests and Levites who come on duty on the Sabbath must 
guard the gates, 

2Ch 23:5 a third the royal palace, a third the Foundation Gate, while the people must all stay in the courts of the 
Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 23:6 No one must enter the Temple of Yahweh except the priests and the ministering Levites; they may 
come in because they are consecrated. But the people must all observe Yahweh’s regulations. 



2Ch 23:7 The Levites must surround the king, each man with his weapons in his hands; anyone who enters the 
Temple must be killed. And you will escort the king when he comes in and when he leaves”. 

2Ch 23:8 The Levites and all Judah did everything as Jehoiada the priest had ordered, and each one brought 
his men, those coming on duty on the Sabbath and those going off duty on the Sabbath, for Jehoiada the priest 
had not released any of the divisions from duty. 

2Ch 23:9 Jehoiada the priest then issued the regimental commanders with King David’s spears and large and 
small shields, which were kept in the Temple of God. 

2Ch 23:10 He then positioned all the people, each man with his weapon in his hand, from the south side of the 
Temple to the north side of the Temple, close to the altar and the Temple, to form a circle round the king. 

2Ch 23:1 1 Then they brought the king’s son out, crowned him, gave him a copy of the covenant and made him 
king. When Jehoiada and his sons had anointed him, they shouted, “Long live the king!”. 

2Ch 23:12 On hearing the people shouting as they ran to acclaim the king, Athaliah joined the people in the 
Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 23:13 When she looked, there stood the king on his dais by the entrance, with the officers and trumpeters 
at the king’s side, and all the people of the country rejoicing and blowing the trumpets, and the singers with their 
musical instruments leading the hymns of praise. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and shouted, “Treason, treason!”. 
2Ch 23:14 Jehoiada the priest then gave the order to the regimental commanders in charge of the troops, “Take 
her out between the ranks and put to the sword anyone who follows her”. For the priest had already said, “Do not 
kill her inside the Temple of Yahweh”. 

2Ch 23:15 So they made way for her, and when she reached the entrance to the Horses’ Gate of the palace, 
they killed her there. 

2Ch 23:16 Jehoiada made a covenant between himself, all the people and the king to remain Yahweh’s people. 
2Ch 23:17 All the people then went to the temple of Baal and demolished it; they smashed its altars and its 
images and killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars. 

2Ch 23:18 Jehoiada entrusted the security of the Temple of Yahweh to the priests and Levites, whom David had 
put in charge of the Temple of Yahweh to present the burnt offerings of Yahweh as laid down in the Law of 
Moses, with joy and song as ordained by David. 

2Ch 23:19 He also appointed gatekeepers for the gates of the Temple of Yahweh, so that no one who was 
unclean might enter for any purpose at all. 

2Ch 23:20 He then took the regimental commanders, the nobles, the government officials and all the people of 
the land and he escorted the king down from the Temple of Yahweh. Entering the palace through the Upper 
Gate, they placed the king on the royal throne. 

2Ch 23:21 All the people of the land were delighted, and the city made no move after Athaliah had been put to 
death. 

2Ch 24:1 Joash was seven years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for forty years in Jerusalem. 
His mother’s name was Zibiah of Beersheba. 

2Ch 24:2 Joash did what Yahweh regards as right throughout the lifetime of Jehoiada the priest. 

2Ch 24:3 Jehoiada found him two wives and he fathered several sons and daughters. 

2Ch 24:4 Later, Joash made up his mind to repair the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 24:5 Calling the priests and the Levites together, he said, “Go out to the towns of Judah and collect money 
from all Israel for annual repairs to the Temple of Yahweh. Do this quickly”. But the Levites were in no hurry, 

2Ch 24:6 so the king summoned Jehoiada the chief priest and said, “Why have you not insisted on the Levites’ 
bringing in the tax from Judah and Jerusalem for the Tent of Witness, as imposed by Moses servant of Yahweh 
and the community of Israel?”. — 

2Ch 24:7 Athaliah and her sons, whom she corrupted, despoiled the Temple of God and even assigned all the 
sacred revenues of the Temple of Yahweh to Baal. 

2Ch 24:8 So, at the king’s order, a chest was made and put outside the gate of the Temple of Yahweh, 

2Ch 24:9 and a proclamation was issued throughout Judah and Jerusalem that the tax, which Moses servant of 
God had imposed on Israel in the desert, was to be brought to Yahweh. 

2Ch 24:10 Then all the officials and all the people gladly brought in their contributions, depositing them in the 
chest until the payment was complete. 

2Ch 24:1 1 Whenever the chest was brought by the Levites for royal inspection and found to contain a large sum 
of money, the king’s secretary and the chief priest’s representative would come and empty the chest and then 
have it returned to its place. This was done day after day and a great deal of money was collected. 

2Ch 24:12 The king and Jehoiada handed it over to the foreman attached to the Temple of Yahweh, and the 
hired masons and carpenters set about repairing the Temple of Yahweh; and iron-workers and bronze-workers 
laboured to repair the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 24:13 The workmen got on with the task — the repair work made good progress at their hands — until they 
had restored the Temple of God to its former state and reconditioned it. 



2Ch 24:14 When they had finished, they brought the balance of the money to the king and Jehoiada, and with 
this vessels were made for the Temple of Yahweh, vessels for the liturgy and for the burnt offerings, bowls and 
other gold and silver vessels. And the perpetual burnt offering was offered in the Temple of Yahweh throughout 
Jehoiada’s lifetime. 

2Ch 24:15 But Jehoiada, growing old, had his fill of days and died. He died at the age of a hundred and thirty 
years, 

2Ch 24:16 and was buried with the kings in the City of David because he had served Israel and God and his 
Temple well. 

2Ch 24:17 After Jehoiada’s death the officials of Judah came to pay court to the king, and the king listened to 
their advice, 

2Ch 24:18 and they abandoned the Temple of Yahweh, God of their ancestors, for the worship of sacred poles 
and idols. Judah and Jerusalem incurred wrath because of this guilt of theirs. 

2Ch 24:19 He sent their prophets to lead them back to Yahweh; these put the case against them, but they 
would not listen. 

2Ch 24:20 The spirit of God then invested Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest. He stood up before the people 
and said, “God says this, ‘Why transgress Yahweh’s commands to your certain ruin? For if you abandon 
Yahweh, he will abandon you’. 

2Ch 24:21 They then plotted against him and, at the king’s order, stoned him in the court of the Temple of 
Yahweh. 

2Ch 24:22 Thus King Joash, forgetful of the devotion which Jehoiada father of Zechariah had displayed on his 
behalf, murdered his son, who cried out as he died, “Yahweh will see this and avenge it!”. 

2Ch 24:23 At the turn of the year, the Aramaean army made war on Joash. When they reached Judah and 
Jerusalem, they massacred all the nation’s government officials and sent all their booty to the king of Damascus. 
2Ch 24:24 Although the invading Aramaean army was only a small body of men, Yahweh allowed them to 
defeat a very large army because they had abandoned Yahweh, God of their ancestors; thus they executed 
judgement on Joash. After they had retired — for they left him seriously wounded- 

2Ch 24:25 his own retainers plotted against him to avenge the blood of the son of Jehoiada the priest and 
murdered him in his bed. When he died he was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings. 

2Ch 24:26 These were the conspirators: Zabad son of Shimeath the Ammonite and Jehozabad son of Shimrith 
the Moabite. 

2Ch 24:27 As regards his sons, the heavy tribute imposed on him, and the restoration of the Temple of God, 
this is recorded in the Commentary on the Book of the Kings. His son Amaziah succeeded him. 

2Ch 25:1 Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for twenty-nine years 
in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 

2Ch 25:2 He did what Yahweh regards as right, though not wholeheartedly. 

2Ch 25:3 Once the kingdom was firmly under his control, he killed those of his retainers who had murdered the 
king his father. 

2Ch 25:4 But he did not put their sons to death; this was in accordance with what is written in the Law, in the 
book of Moses, where Yahweh had commanded, “Parents may not be put to death for children, nor children for 
parents, but each must be put to death for his own crime”. 

2Ch 25:5 Amaziah summoned Judah and organised all Judah and Benjamin by families under commanders of 
thousands and commanders of hundreds. He also made a register of those who were twenty years old and 
upwards, and found there were three hundred thousand picked men, ready for service and capable of wielding 
spear and shield. 

2Ch 25:6 Furthermore, he hired a hundred thousand tough fighting men from Israel for a hundred talents of 
silver. 

2Ch 25:7 A man of God then came to him and said, “My lord king, do not let the Israelite troops march with you, 
for Yahweh is not with Israel or with any of the Ephraimites. 

2Ch 25:8 For however valiantly you act in war, God will bring you down before the enemy, for God has the 
power to uphold or to throw down”. 

2Ch 25:9 Amaziah said to the man of God, “But what about the hundred talents which I have paid for the 
Israelite troops?”. “Yahweh can give you far more than that”, said the man of God. 

2Ch 25:10 At this, Amaziah dismissed the troops who had come to him from Ephraim and sent them home 
again. They were furious with Judah and went home in a great rage. 

2Ch 25:1 1 Amaziah then, coming to a decision, led out his own troops and, having reached the Valley of Salt, 
struck down ten thousand Seirites. 

2Ch 25:12 The men of Judah captured ten thousand more alive and, taking them to the summit of the Rock, 
threw them off the summit of the Rock so that they were all dashed to pieces. 

2Ch 25:13 Meanwhile, the troops whom Amaziah had dismissed and not allowed to go into battle with him rased 



the towns of Judah, from Samaria to Beth-Horon, killing three thousand of their inhabitants and capturing great 
quantities of plunder. 

2Ch 25:14 On returning from his slaughter of the Edomites, Amaziah brought the gods of the Seirites with him; 
he set these up as his gods, bowing down before them and burning incense to them. 

2Ch 25:15 Yahweh’s anger was aroused by Amaziah and he sent him a prophet, who said to him, “Why do you 
consult those people’s gods when they could not save their own people from your clutches?”. 

2Ch 25:16 He was still speaking when Amaziah interrupted him. “Have we appointed you a royal counsellor? 
Stop, as you value your life!”. So the prophet stopped, and then said, “I know that God has decided to destroy you 
for having done this and for not listening to my advice”. 

2Ch 25:17 After consultation, Amaziah king of Judah then sent a message to Joash son of Jehoahaz son of 
Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come and make a trial of strength!”. 

2Ch 25:18 Joash king of Israel sent back word to Amaziah king of Judah, “The thistle of Lebanon sent a 
message to the cedar of Lebanon, saying, ‘Give my son your daughter in marriage’; but a wild animal of the 
Lebanon ran over the thistle and squashed it. 

2Ch 25:19 ‘Look at me, the conqueror of Edom’, you say, and now aspire to even greater glory. But stay where 
you belong! Why challenge disaster, to your own and Judah’s ruin?”. 

2Ch 25:20 But Amaziah would not listen, for this was an act of God to deliver them up for having consulted the 
gods of Edom. 

2Ch 25:21 So Joash king of Israel marched to the attack. And at Beth-Shemesh, which belongs to Judah, he 
and Amaziah king of Judah made their trial of strength. 

2Ch 25:22 Judah was defeated by Israel, and everyone fled to his tent. 

2Ch 25:23 The king of Judah, Amaziah son of Joash, son of Ahaziah, was taken prisoner at Beth-Shemesh by 
Joash king of Israel who led him off to Jerusalem, where he demolished four hundred cubits of the city wall 
between the Ephraim Gate and the Corner Gate; 

2Ch 25:24 he then took back with him to Samaria all the gold and silver, and all the vessels to be found in the 
Temple of God in the care of Obed-Edom, the treasures in the palace, and hostages besides. 

2Ch 25:25 Amaziah son of Joash, king of Judah, lived for fifteen years after the death of Joash son of 
Jehoahaz, king of Israel. 

2Ch 25:26 The rest of the history of Amaziah, from first to last, is this not recorded in the Book of the Kings of 
Judah and Israel? 

2Ch 25:27 Some time after Amaziah had defected from Yahweh, a plot having been hatched against him in 
Jerusalem, he fled to Lachish where he was murdered. 

2Ch 25:28 He was then transported by horse and buried with his ancestors in the city of David. 

2Ch 26:1 All the people then chose Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in succession to his 
father Amaziah. 

2Ch 26:2 It was he who rebuilt Elath, recovering it for Judah, after the king had fallen asleep with his ancestors. 
2Ch 26:3 Uzziah was sixteen years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for fifty-two years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 

2Ch 26:4 He did what is pleasing to Yahweh, just as his father Amaziah had done; 

2Ch 26:5 he consulted God throughout the lifetime of Zechariah, who instructed him in the fear of God. And as 
long as he consulted Yahweh, God gave him success. 

2Ch 26:6 He went on campaign against the Philistines, demolished the walls of Gath, the walls of Jabneh and 
the walls of Ashdod, and built towns in the area of Ashdod and elsewhere in Philistine territory. 

2Ch 26:7 God helped him against the Philistines, the Arabs living at Gur-Baal and the Meunites. 

2Ch 26:8 The Meunites paid tribute to Uzziah and his fame spread as far as the frontier of Egypt, since he kept 
growing stronger and stronger. 

2Ch 26:9 Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem, at the Corner Gate, at the Valley Gate and at the Angle, and fortified 
them. 

2Ch 26:10 He built towers in the desert too, and dug many storage-wells, for he had large herds in the lowlands 
and on the tableland, and farmers and vine dressers in the hills and fertile lands: for he loved the land. 

2Ch 26:1 1 Uzziah had a trained army ready to go on campaign, organised in companies manned as detailed by 
the scribe Jeiel and the staff-officer Maaseiah, and commanded by Hananiah one of the king’s generals. 

2Ch 26:12 The heads of families of the military champions numbered in all two thousand six hundred. 

2Ch 26:13 Under them was an army of three hundred and seven thousand five hundred men ready for war, a 
powerful force to support the king against the enemy. 

2Ch 26:14 Uzziah provided shields, spears, helmets, armour, bows and sling-stones for the entire army. 

2Ch 26:15 He also erected expertly contrived devices for the towers and angles of Jerusalem from which to 
shoot arrows and drop large stones. His fame spread far and wide, for he was miraculously helped to become 
strong. 



2Ch 26:16 But once he was strong, his arrogance was such that it led to his downfall; he was unfaithful to 
Yahweh his God by entering the Temple of Yahweh to burn incense on the altar of incense. 

2Ch 26:17 Azariah the priest with eight brave priests of Yahweh followed him in; 

2Ch 26:18 confronting King Uzziah, they said to him, “Uzziah, you are not allowed to burn incense to Yahweh; 
only the Aaronite priests consecrated for the purpose may burn incense. Leave the sanctuary, for you have been 
unfaithful and will have no honour from Yahweh God”. 

2Ch 26:19 Uzziah, censer in hand to burn incense, flew into a rage. But while he was raging at the priests, a 
virulent skin-disease broke out on his forehead in the presence of the priests, in the Temple of Yahweh, there by 
the altar of incense. 

2Ch 26:20 When Azariah the chief priest and all the other priests turned towards him, there was skin-disease on 
his forehead and they hurried him outside, and he himself was equally anxious to get out, because Yahweh had 
struck him. 

2Ch 26:21 King Uzziah was afflicted with skin-disease till his dying day. Because of this, he lived confined to his 
room and was excluded from the Temple of Yahweh, while Jotham his son, who was master of the palace, 
governed the people of the country. 

2Ch 26:22 The rest of the history of Uzziah, from first to last, has been written by the prophet Isaiah son of 
Amoz. 

2Ch 26:23 Then Uzziah fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried with them in the field beside the burial 
ground of the kings since, it was reasoned, he was afflicted with virulent skin-disease. His son Jotham then 
succeeded him. 

2Ch 27:1 Jotham was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for sixteen years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerushah daughter of Zadok. 

2Ch 27:2 He did what Yahweh regards as right, just as his father Uzziah had done. Only he did not enter 
Yahweh’s sanctuary. But the people continued to do wrong. 

2Ch 27:3 It was he who built the Upper Gate of the Temple of Yahweh and carried out considerable work on the 
wall of the Ophel. 

2Ch 27:4 He also built towns in the highlands of Judah and built forts and towers in the wooded areas. 

2Ch 27:5 He also went to war against the king of the Ammonites and defeated them; and the Ammonites had to 
give him a hundred talents of silver, ten thousand kor of wheat and ten thousand of barley that year. And the 
Ammonites paid him the same amount, the second and third years afterwards. 

2Ch 27:6 Jotham became powerful because he kept an unswerving course before Yahweh his God. 

2Ch 27:7 The rest of the history of Jotham, all his wars and his policy, are recorded in the Book of the Kings of 
Israel and Judah. 

2Ch 27:8 He was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for sixteen years in 
Jerusalem. 

2Ch 27:9 Then Jotham fell asleep with his ancestors, and was buried in the City of David; his son Ahaz 
succeeded him. 

2Ch 28:1 Ahaz was twenty years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for sixteen years in 
Jerusalem. He did not do what Yahweh regards as right, as his ancestor David had done. 

2Ch 28:2 He followed the example of the kings of Israel, even having images cast for the Baals; 

2Ch 28:3 he burned incense in the Valley of Ben-Hinnom, caused his sons to pass through the fire of sacrifice, 
copying the disgusting practices of the nations whom Yahweh had dispossessed for the Israelites. 

2Ch 28:4 He offered sacrifices and incense on the high places, on the hills and under every green tree. 

2Ch 28:5 So Yahweh his God put him at the mercy of the king of Aram, who defeated him and took large 
numbers of captives, carrying them off to Damascus. He also put him at the mercy of the king of Israel, who 
inflicted heavy casualties on him. 

2Ch 28:6 In a single day, Pekah son of Remaliah killed a hundred and twenty thousand in Judah, all of them 
prominent men, because they had abandoned Yahweh, God of their ancestors. 

2Ch 28:7 Zichri, an Ephraimite champion, killed Maaseiah the king’s son, Azrikam the controller of the 
household and Elkanah the king’s second-in-command. 

2Ch 28:8 Of their brothers, the Israelites took two hundred thousand captive including wives, sons, daughters; 
they also took quantities of booty, carrying everything off to Samaria. 

2Ch 28:9 Now there was a prophet of Yahweh there by the name of Oded, who went out to meet the troops 
returning to Samaria and said, “Look, because Yahweh, God of your ancestors, was angry with Judah, he put 
them at your mercy, but you have slaughtered them with such fury as reached to heaven, 

2Ch 28:10 and now you propose to reduce the children of Judah and Jerusalem to being your male and female 
slaves! Have you not yourselves committed sins against Yahweh your God? 

2Ch 28:1 1 Now listen to me: release the captives you have taken from your brothers, for the fierce anger of 
Yahweh hangs over you”. 



2Ch 28:12 Some of the Ephraimite chieftains — Azariah son of Jehohanan, Berechaiah son of Meshillemoth, 
Jehizkiah son of Shallum and Amasa son of Hadlai — then protested to those returning from the war 
2Ch 28:13 and said to them, “You must not bring the captives here, for we have already sinned against Yahweh 
and you propose to add to our sin and guilt, although our guilt is already great, and fierce anger is hanging over 
Israel”. 

2Ch 28:14 So in the presence of the officials and whole assembly, the soldiers gave up the captives and the 
booty. 

2Ch 28:15 Men nominated for the purpose then took charge of the captives. From the booty they clothed all 
those of them who were naked; they gave them clothing and sandals, provided them with food and drink, 
mounted on donkeys all those who were infirm and took them back to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their 
brothers. Then they returned to Samaria. 

2Ch 28:16 This was when King Ahaz sent asking the king of Assyria to come to his assistance. 

2Ch 28:17 The Edomites again invaded, defeated Judah, and carried off captives, 

2Ch 28:18 while the Philistines raided the towns in the lowlands and in the Negeb of Judah, capturing Beth- 
Shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, Soco and its dependencies, Timnah and its dependencies and Gimzo and its 
dependencies, and settled there. 

2Ch 28:19 For Yahweh brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel, since he behaved without restraint in 
Judah and had been unfaithful to Yahweh. 

2Ch 28:20 Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria attacked and besieged him; but he could not overpower him. 

2Ch 28:21 Although Ahaz robbed the Temple of Yahweh and the palaces of the king and princes and gave the 
proceeds to the king of Assyria, he received no help from him. 

2Ch 28:22 During the time when he was under siege he disobeyed Yahweh even more grossly, this King Ahaz. 
2Ch 28:23 For he offered sacrifices to the gods of Damascus who had defeated him. “Since the gods of the 
kings of Aram”, he thought, “have supported them, I shall sacrifice to them, and perhaps they will help me”. But 
they proved to be his and all Israel’s downfall. 

2Ch 28:24 Ahaz then collected the equipment of the Temple of God, broke up the equipment of the Temple of 
God, sealed the doors of the Temple of Yahweh and put his own altars in every corner of Jerusalem; 

2Ch 28:25 he set up high places in every town of Judah to burn incense to other gods, thus provoking the anger 
of Yahweh, God of his ancestors. 

2Ch 28:26 The rest of his history, his whole policy, from first to last, is recorded in the Book of the Kings of 
Judah and Israel. 

2Ch 28:27 Then Ahaz fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the City, in Jerusalem, though he was not 
taken to the tombs of the kings of Israel. His son Hezekiah succeeded him. 

2Ch 29:1 Hezekiah was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne and he reigned for twenty-nine years 
in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abijah daughter of Zechariah. 

2Ch 29:2 He did what Yahweh regards as right, just as his ancestor David had done. 

2Ch 29:3 In the first month of the first year of his reign, he opened the doors of the Temple of Yahweh, having 
repaired them. 

2Ch 29:4 He then brought in the priests and the Levites, assembled them in the eastern square, 

2Ch 29:5 and said to them, “Listen to me, Levites! First sanctify yourselves, then sanctify the Temple of 
Yahweh, God of your ancestors, and remove the filth from the sanctuary. 

2Ch 29:6 Our ancestors were unfaithful, and did what is displeasing to Yahweh our God. They abandoned him, 
turned their faces away from Yahweh’s home and turned their backs on him. 

2Ch 29:7 They even closed the doors of the portico, put out the lamps and stopped burning incense and making 
burnt offerings in the sanctuary of the God of Israel. 

2Ch 29:8 This was why Yahweh’s anger fell on Judah and Jerusalem and he made them an object of terror, 
astonishment and derision, as you can see for yourselves. 

2Ch 29:9 Yes, our ancestors were put to the sword, and our sons, our daughters and our wives were taken 
captive because of this. 

2Ch 29:10 I am now determined to make a covenant with Yahweh, God of Israel, so that his fierce anger may 
turn away from us. 

2Ch 29:1 1 Now, my sons, do not be remiss, for Yahweh has chosen you to stand in his presence and serve him 
by conducting his worship and offering him incense”. 

2Ch 29:12 The Levites set about it — Mahath son of Amasai and Joel son of Azariah, from the Kohathites; Kish 
son of Abdi and Azariah son of Jehallel, from the Merarites; Joah son of Zimmah and Eden son of Joah, from the 
Gershonites; 

2Ch 29:13 Shimri and Jeuel, of the sons of Elizaphan; Zechariah and Mattaniah of the sons of Asaph; 

2Ch 29:14 Jehiel and Shimei of the sons of Heman; Shemaiah and Uzziel of the sons of Jeduthun- 
2Ch 29:15 and gathered their brothers together; they sanctified themselves, and in obedience to the king’s 



order, in accordance with the words of Yahweh, they came to purify the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 29:16 The priests went into the inner part of the Temple of Yahweh to purify it. They brought all the unclean 
things which they found in Yahweh’s sanctuary, out into the court of the Temple of Yahweh, where the Levites 
collected them and took them out to the Kidron Valley. 

2Ch 29:17 They began sanctifying on the first day of the first month, and by the eighth day of the month had 
reached Yahweh’s portico; thus they took eight days to sanctify the Temple of Yahweh, and by the sixteenth day 
of the first month everything was finished. 

2Ch 29:18 They then waited on King Hezekiah and said, “We have purified the whole Temple of Yahweh, the 
altar of burnt offering with all its equipment and the table for the loaves of permanent offering with all their 
equipment. 

2Ch 29:19 We have also got ready and sanctified all the equipment which King Ahaz in his infidelity had 
removed during his reign. It is all ready in front of Yahweh’s altar”. 

2Ch 29:20 King Hezekiah lost no time but called the officials of the city together and went up to the Temple of 
Yahweh. 

2Ch 29:21 They brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven lambs and seven goats as a sin sacrifice for the royal 
house, for the sanctuary and for Judah, and he ordered the Aaronite priests to offer them on Yahweh’s altar. 

2Ch 29:22 So they slaughtered the bulls and the priests took the blood and sprinkled it over the altar. They then 
slaughtered the rams and sprinkled the blood over the altar; and they slaughtered the lambs and sprinkled the 
blood over the altar. 

2Ch 29:23 Then they brought the goats, the sacrifice for sin, before the king and the assembly who laid their 
hands on them. 

2Ch 29:24 The priests slaughtered them and made a sacrifice for sin with their blood at the altar to expiate for 
all Israel, since the king had ordered the burnt offering and the sacrifice for sin on behalf of all Israel. 

2Ch 29:25 He positioned the Levites in the Temple of Yahweh with cymbals, lyres and harps, in accordance 
with the ordinance of David, of Gad the king’s seer and of Nathan the prophet, for such was Yahweh’s order 
conveyed through his prophets. 

2Ch 29:26 When the Levites stood with David’s musical instruments, and the priests with the trumpets, 

2Ch 29:27 Hezekiah ordered the burnt offering to be presented on the altar. And as the burnt offering began, 
the hymns of Yahweh began too, and the trumpets sounded, to the accompaniment of the instruments of David 
king of Israel, 

2Ch 29:28 while the whole congregation worshipped, the singers singing and the trumpeters sounding the 
trumpets, continuously until the burnt offering was over. 

2Ch 29:29 When the burnt offering was finished, the king and all those present with him fell to their knees and 
worshipped. 

2Ch 29:30 Then King Hezekiah and the officials told the Levites to sing praise to Yahweh in the words of David 
and Asaph the seer; and joyfully they sang their praises, then knelt in worship. 

2Ch 29:31 Hezekiah spoke again, “Now that you have consecrated yourselves to Yahweh, come forward and 
bring thanksgiving sacrifices to the Temple of Yahweh”. Then the congregation brought thanksgiving sacrifices 
and those who were generous brought burnt offerings. 

2Ch 29:32 The number of burnt offerings brought by the congregation was seventy bulls, a hundred rams and 
two hundred lambs, all as burnt offerings for Yahweh. 

2Ch 29:33 The consecrated gifts amounted to six hundred bulls and three thousand sheep. 

2Ch 29:34 The priests were too few, however, and were unable to dismember all the burnt offerings, so their 
brothers, the Levites, helped them until the work was finished and the priests had sanctified themselves; for the 
Levites had been more conscientious about sanctifying themselves than the priests had. 

2Ch 29:35 In addition to the abundance of burnt offerings, there were also the fatty pieces for communion 
sacrifices and the libations for the burnt offerings. And so the liturgy of Yahweh’s Temple was restored, 

2Ch 29:36 and Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced over what God had provided for the people, since 
everything had happened so suddenly. 

2Ch 30:1 Hezekiah sent messengers to all Israel and Judah, and also wrote letters to Ephraim and Manasseh, 
bidding them come to the Temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover in honour of Yahweh, God 
of Israel. 

2Ch 30:2 For the king and his officials and the whole congregation in Jerusalem had agreed to celebrate the 
Passover in the second month, 

2Ch 30:3 having been unable to celebrate it at the proper time, since the priests had not purified themselves in 
sufficient number, and the people were not assembled in Jerusalem. 

2Ch 30:4 And since this arrangement seemed fitting to the king and the whole congregation, 

2Ch 30:5 they resolved to send a proclamation throughout Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, calling on the people 
to come to Jerusalem and celebrate a Passover in honour of Yahweh, God of Israel, since they had not 



celebrated it in a body as prescribed. 

2Ch 30:6 So, by order of the king, courtiers set out with letters from the king and his officials for every part of 
Israel and Judah, saying, “Israelites, return to Yahweh, God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, and he will return to 
those of you who are left and have escaped the grasp of the kings of Assyria. 

2Ch 30:7 Do not be like your fathers and brothers who were unfaithful to Yahweh, God of their ancestors; he 
brought them to ruin, as you can see. 

2Ch 30:8 Do not be stubborn like your ancestors. Submit to Yahweh, come to his sanctuary which he has 
consecrated for ever, and serve Yahweh your God, so that his fierce anger may turn away from you. 

2Ch 30:9 For if you return to Yahweh, your brothers and your sons will be treated mercifully by their captors and 
be allowed to return to this country; for Yahweh your God is gracious and merciful and will not turn his face away 
from you, if you return to him”. 

2Ch 30:10 The courtiers went from town to town through the territory of Ephraim and Manasseh and as far as 
Zebulon but the people laughed and scoffed at them; 

2Ch 30:1 1 even so, some people from Asher and Manasseh and Zebulon were humble enough to come to 
Jerusalem, 

2Ch 30:12 while in Judah the hand of God was also at work inspiring a unanimous desire to obey the order of 
the king and the officials in accordance with the word of Yahweh. 

2Ch 30:13 A huge crowd assembled in Jerusalem to celebrate the feast of Unleavened Bread in the second 
month. An immense crowd 

2Ch 30:14 set to work removing the altars then in Jerusalem; they also removed all the incense altars and threw 
them into the Kidron Valley. 

2Ch 30:15 They then slaughtered the Passover victims on the fourteenth day of the second month. Ashamed of 
themselves, the priests and Levites had in the meanwhile sanctified themselves and brought burnt offerings to 
the Temple of Yahweh, 

2Ch 30:16 so they now stood in their positions prescribed in the Law of Moses man of God, the priests 
sprinkling the blood handed to them by the Levites. 

2Ch 30:17 Since many people in the congregation had not sanctified themselves, the Levites took care of the 
slaughter of the Passover victims to consecrate them to Yahweh for all who were not clean. 

2Ch 30:18 For a great many people, especially from Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulon, had not 
purified themselves, since they did not eat the Passover as prescribed. But Hezekiah prayed for them as follows, 
“May Yahweh in his goodness pardon 

2Ch 30:19 everyone whose heart is set on seeking God, Yahweh, God of his ancestors, even if he has not been 
purified as holy things demand”. 

2Ch 30:20 Yahweh listened to Hezekiah and left the people unharmed. 

2Ch 30:21 Amid great rejoicing, the Israelites present in Jerusalem celebrated the feast of Unleavened Bread 
for seven days, while day after day the Levites and the priests praised Yahweh with all their might. 

2Ch 30:22 Hezekiah then encouraged all the Levites who had such understanding of Yahweh. Having finished 
the seven-day festival, during which they sacrificed communion sacrifices and praised Yahweh, God of their 
ancestors, 

2Ch 30:23 the whole congregation decided to celebrate for a further seven days. So they joyfully celebrated for 
another seven days, 

2Ch 30:24 Hezekiah king of Judah contributing a thousand bulls and seven thousand sheep for the 
congregation, and the officials another thousand bulls and ten thousand sheep. And a large number of priests 
sanctified themselves. 

2Ch 30:25 The whole congregation of Judah, the priests, the Levites, the whole congregation coming from 
Israel and the foreigners coming from the territory of Israel as well as those resident in Judah, rejoiced. 

2Ch 30:26 There was great rejoicing in Jerusalem, for since the days of Solomon son of David, king of Israel, 
nothing comparable had ever occurred in Jerusalem. 

2Ch 30:27 The levitical priests then stood up and blessed the people and their voice was heard, and their prayer 
reached his holy dwelling in heaven. 

2Ch 31:1 When all this was complete, all Israel present went out to the towns of Judah, broke the pillars, cut 
down the sacred poles, wrecked the high places and the altars, and did away with them entirely throughout 
Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh. Then all the Israelites returned to their towns, everyone to his 
property. 

2Ch 31 :2 Hezekiah re-established the priestly and levitical orders, each man in his proper order according to his 
duties, whether priest or Levite, to bring burnt offerings and communion sacrifices, to serve and to give thanks 
and praise within the gates of Yahweh’s camp. 

2Ch 31 :3 He also established a king’s portion from his possessions for the morning and evening burnt offerings, 
and the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths, New Moons and festivals, as laid down in the Law of Yahweh. 



2Ch 31 :4 He furthermore requested the people living in Jerusalem to present the portion for the priests and 
Levites so that they might devote themselves to the Law of Yahweh. 

2Ch 31 :5 As soon as the order had been promulgated, the Israelites provided the first fruits of grain, new wine, 
olive oil, honey and every other kind of agricultural produce in abundance; they brought in an abundant tithe of 
everything. 

2Ch 31 :6 The Israelites and Judaeans living in the towns of Judah also brought in the tithe of cattle and sheep, 
and the tithe of sacred gifts consecrated to Yahweh their God, laying them in heaps. 

2Ch 31 :7 They began accumulating the heaps in the third month and had finished them by the seventh. 

2Ch 31 :8 When Hezekiah and the officials came to inspect the heaps they praised Yahweh and his people 
Israel. 

2Ch 31 :9 While Hezekiah was questioning the priests and Levites about the heaps, 

2Ch 31:10 Azariah, the chief priest, of the family of Zadok, replied as follows, “Since they began bringing the 
contributions to the Temple of Yahweh”, he said, “we have had enough to eat and quantities left over, for Yahweh 
has blessed his people; this mass of stuff is left”. 

2Ch 31:11 Hezekiah then ordered them to have storerooms prepared in the Temple of Yahweh and, when they 
had got them ready, 

2Ch 31:12 they conscientiously brought in the contributions, tithes and consecrated gifts, Conaniah the Levite 
was put in charge of them, with Shimei his brother as his assistant, 

2Ch 31:13 and with Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jeremith, Jozabad, Eliel, Ismachiah, Mahath, and Benaiah 
as overseers under Conaniah and his brother Shimei, by order of King Hezekiah and of Azariah, the chief of the 
Temple of God. 

2Ch 31:14 Kore son of Jimnah the Levite, keeper of the eastern gate, was made responsible for the voluntary 
offerings to God and for providing the portion set aside for Yahweh and the most holy gifts. 

2Ch 31:15 Supporting him loyally in the priestly towns were Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah and 
Shechaniah, who made the distributions to their brothers in their various orders, whether high or low, 

2Ch 31:16 irrespective of their official genealogy, to the males of thirty years and upwards — to each one who 
attended the Temple of Yahweh to fulfil his daily obligations — for the performance of their duties appropriate to 
their orders: 

2Ch 31:17 the priests being registered according to family and the Levites of twenty years and upwards 
according to their duties within their orders. 

2Ch 31:18 And the official genealogy included all their household, their wives, their sons and their daughters, 
throughout the community, since these men were obliged to keep sanctifying themselves anew. 

2Ch 31:19 The Aaronite priests who lived on the pasture lands belonging to their towns, had men named in 
every town to distribute portions to every male among the priests and to everyone included in the official 
genealogy of the Levites. 

2Ch 31 :20 Hezekiah did this throughout all Judah. He did what Yahweh his God regards as good and right and 
loyal. 

2Ch 31 :21 Everything that he undertook, whether in the service of the Temple of God or in connection with the 
law or the commandments, he did in absolute devotion to his God, and so succeeded. 

2Ch 32:1 After these loyal actions, Sennacherib king of Assyria advanced and invaded Judah, and laid siege to 
the fortified towns, intending to demolish them. 

2Ch 32:2 Hezekiah, realising that Sennacherib’s advance was the preliminary to an attack on Jerusalem, 

2Ch 32:3 consulted his officers and warriors about sealing off the waters of the springs outside the city, and they 
supported him. 

2Ch 32:4 So a large number of people were called out to block all the springs and cut off the watercourse 
flowing through the country. “Why”, they said, “should the kings of Assyria find plenty of water when they arrive?”. 
2Ch 32:5 Acting with determination, he also repaired all the damaged parts of the wall, built towers on it, 
constructed a second wall on the outer side, strengthened the Millo of the City of David and made quantities of 
missiles and shields. 

2Ch 32:6 He then appointed generals to command the people, summoned them to him in the square by the city 
gate and spoke as follows to encourage them, 

2Ch 32:7 “Be strong and brave; do not be afraid or tremble when you face the king of Assyria and the whole 
horde he brings with him, for there are more on our side than on his. 

2Ch 32:8 He has only human strength, but we have Yahweh our God to help us and fight our battles”. The 
people took heart at the words of Hezekiah king of Judah. 

2Ch 32:9 Next, Sennacherib king of Assyria, who was then besieging Lachish with all his forces, sent his 
representatives to Jerusalem, to Hezekiah king of Judah, and all Judah at Jerusalem, with the following 
message, 

2Ch 32:10 “Sennacherib king of Assyria says this, ‘What gives you the confidence to remain in the fortress of 



Jerusalem? 

2Ch 32:1 1 Isn’t Hezekiah deluding you, only to condemn you to die of famine and thirst, when he says: Yahweh 
our God will save us from the King of Assyria’s clutches? 

2Ch 32:12 Isn’t Hezekiah the very man who has suppressed his high places and altars, and given the order to 
Judah and to Jerusalem: You must worship before one altar and on that alone offer incense? 

2Ch 32:13 Don’t you know what I and my ancestors have done to all the peoples of the other countries? Have 
the national gods of those countries had the slightest success in saving their countries from my clutches? 

2Ch 32:14 Of all the gods of those nations whom my ancestors devoted to destruction, which one has been able 
to save his people from my clutches, for your god to be able to save you from my clutches? 

2Ch 32:15 Do not let Hezekiah mislead you. Do not let him delude you like this. Do not believe him, for no god 
of any nation or kingdom has been able to save his people from me or from my ancestors’ clutches. No more will 
your god be able to save you from my clutches’”. 

2Ch 32:16 And his representatives said a great deal more, maligning Yahweh God, and his servant Hezekiah. 
2Ch 32:17 He also wrote a letter to insult Yahweh, God of Israel, maligning him as follows, “Just as the national 
gods of the other countries could not save their peoples from my clutches, so Hezekiah’s god cannot save his 
people from my clutches”. 

2Ch 32:18 They then shouted loudly in the Judaean language to the people of Jerusalem on the ramparts to 
frighten and confuse them, in the hope of capturing the city, 

2Ch 32:19 maligning the God of Jerusalem as though he were one of the man-made gods of other peoples in 
the world. 

2Ch 32:20 Then King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz prayed and cried out to Heaven about this, 
2Ch 32:21 and Yahweh sent an angel who destroyed every warrior, commander and officer in the king of 
Assyria’s camp. So he had to retire shamefacedly to his own country and when he went into the temple of his 
god, some of his own sons there struck him down with the sword. 

2Ch 32:22 So Yahweh saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the clutches of Sennacherib king 
of Assyria and of everyone else, and gave them peace on every side. 

2Ch 32:23 Many people then brought gifts to Yahweh in Jerusalem and valuable presents to Hezekiah king of 
Judah; from then on, all the other nations held him in high esteem. 

2Ch 32:24 About then Hezekiah fell ill and was at the point of death. He prayed to Yahweh, who heard him and 
granted him a sign. 

2Ch 32:25 But Hezekiah made no return for the benefit which he had received; he became proud and brought 
retribution on himself and on Judah and Jerusalem. 

2Ch 32:26 Then, however, Hezekiah did humble himself in his pride, and so did the inhabitants of Jerusalem; as 
a result of which, Yahweh’s retribution did not overtake them during Hezekiah’s lifetime. 

2Ch 32:27 Hezekiah enjoyed immense riches and honour. He built himself treasuries for gold, silver, precious 
stones, spices, jewels and every kind of desirable object, 

2Ch 32:28 as well as storehouses for his returns of grain, new wine and olive oil, and stalls for all kinds of cattle 
and pens for the flocks. 

2Ch 32:29 He also provided himself with donkeys in addition to his immense wealth of flocks and herds, since 
God had made him immensely wealthy. 

2Ch 32:30 It was Hezekiah who stopped the upper outlet of the waters of Gihon and directed them straight 
down on the west side of the City of David. Hezekiah succeeded in all that he undertook, 

2Ch 32:31 although when the envoys were sent to him by the rulers of Babylon to enquire about the 
extraordinary thing which had taken place in the country, God left him alone to test him and discover what lay in 
his heart. 

2Ch 32:32 The rest of the history of Hezekiah, and his deeds of faithful love, are recorded in the Vision of the 
prophet Isaiah son of Amoz, in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. 

2Ch 32:33 Then Hezekiah fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the upper section of the tombs of the 
sons of David. All Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem paid him honours at his death. His son Manasseh 
succeeded him. 

2Ch 33:1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for fifty-five years in 
Jerusalem. 

2Ch 33:2 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, copying the disgusting practices of the nations whom Yahweh 
had dispossessed for the Israelites. 

2Ch 33:3 He rebuilt the high places which his father Hezekiah had demolished, he set up altars to Baal and 
made sacred poles, he worshipped the whole array of heaven and served it. 

2Ch 33:4 He built altars in the Temple of Yahweh, of which Yahweh had said, “My name will be in Jerusalem for 
ever”. 

2Ch 33:5 He built altars to the whole array of heaven in the two courts of the Temple of Yahweh. 



2Ch 33:6 He caused his sons to pass through the fire of sacrifice in the Valley of Ben-Hinnom. He practised 
soothsaying, divination and sorcery, and had dealings with mediums and spirit-guides. He did very many more 
things displeasing to Yahweh, thus provoking his anger. 

2Ch 33:7 He put a sculpted image, an idol which he had had made, inside the Temple of which God had said to 
David and his son Solomon, “In this Temple and in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of 
Israel, I shall put my name for ever. 

2Ch 33:8 Nor shall I ever again remove Israel’s foot from the soil on which I established your ancestors on 
condition that they were careful to observe all I commanded them as laid down in the whole Law, the statutes 
and the ordinances, given through Moses”. 

2Ch 33:9 But Manasseh misled Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem into doing worse things than the nations 
which Yahweh had destroyed for the Israelites. 

2Ch 33:10 When Yahweh spoke to Manasseh and his people, they would not listen. 

2Ch 33:1 1 Yahweh then brought down on them the generals of the king of Assyria’s army who captured 
Manasseh with hooks, put him in chains and took him to Babylon. 

2Ch 33:12 While in his distress, he placated Yahweh his God by genuinely humbling himself before the God of 
his ancestors. 

2Ch 33:13 When he prayed to him, he was moved by his entreaty, heard his supplication and brought him back 
to Jerusalem to his kingdom. Manasseh realised then that Yahweh is God. 

2Ch 33:14 Afterwards, he rebuilt the outer wall of the City of David, to the west of Gihon, in the valley, up to the 
Fish Gate and round the Ophel, and made it very much higher. And he stationed military governors in all the 
fortified towns of Judah. 

2Ch 33:15 He also removed the foreign gods and the idol from the Temple of Yahweh, as well as all the altars 
which he had built on the mountain of the Temple of Yahweh and in Jerusalem, and threw them out of the city. 
2Ch 33:16 He repaired the altar of Yahweh and offered communion sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings on it, 
and commanded Judah to serve Yahweh, God of Israel. 

2Ch 33:17 The people, however, went on sacrificing at the high places, although only to Yahweh their God. 

2Ch 33:18 The rest of the history of Manasseh, his prayer to his God, and the prophecies of the seers who 
spoke to him in the name of Yahweh, God of Israel, can be found in the Annals of the Kings of Israel. 

2Ch 33:19 His prayer and how God was moved by his entreaty, all his sins, his infidelity, the sites where he built 
high places and set up sacred poles and idols before humbling himself, are set down in the records of Hozai. 

2Ch 33:20 Then Manasseh fell asleep with his ancestors and was buried in the garden of his palace. His son 
Amon succeeded him. 

2Ch 33:21 Amon was twenty-two years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for two years in 
Jerusalem. 

2Ch 33:22 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, as his father Manasseh had done, for Amon sacrificed to all 
the images which his father Manasseh had made, and served them. 

2Ch 33:23 He did not humble himself before Yahweh as his father Manasseh had done; on the contrary, Amon 
wilfully added to his guilt. 

2Ch 33:24 His retinue plotted against him and killed him in his own palace. 

2Ch 33:25 The people of the country, however, slaughtered all those who had plotted against King Amon and 
proclaimed his son Josiah as his successor. 

2Ch 34:1 Josiah was eight years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for thirty-one years in 
Jerusalem. 

2Ch 34:2 He did what is pleasing to Yahweh, and followed the example of his ancestor David, not deviating 
from it to right or to left. 

2Ch 34:3 In the eighth year of his reign, when he was still a youth, he began to seek the God of his ancestor 
David. In the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem of the high places, the sacred poles and the 
sculpted and cast images. 

2Ch 34:4 He superintended the smashing of the altars of Baal, he broke up the incense altars standing above 
them, he shattered the sacred poles and the sculpted and cast images and reduced them to powder, scattering 
the powder on the graves of those who had sacrificed to them. 

2Ch 34:5 He burned the bones of their priests on their altars and so purified Judah and Jerusalem. 

2Ch 34:6 In the towns of Manasseh, Ephraim and Simeon, as far as Naphtali, and round their open spaces, 

2Ch 34:7 he smashed the altars and sacred poles, reduced the sculpted images to powder and broke up all the 
incense altars throughout the territory of Israel. Then he returned to Jerusalem. 

2Ch 34:8 In the eighteenth year of his reign, after purging the country and the Temple, he commissioned 
Shaphan son of Azaliah, Maaseiah governor of the city and the herald Joah son of Joahaz, to repair the Temple 
of Yahweh his God. 

2Ch 34:9 When they came to the high priest Hilkiah, they handed over the money contributed to the Temple of 



God and collected by the levitical guardians of the threshold from Manasseh and Ephraim, from all the rest of 
Israel, from all Judah and Benjamin, and from the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

2Ch 34:10 They handed it over to the masters of works attached to the Temple of Yahweh, and these gave it to 
the men working on the Temple of Yahweh to repair and restore the Temple; 

2Ch 34:1 1 they gave it to the craftsmen and builders for buying dressed stone and timber for beams, to 
underpin the buildings which the kings of Judah had allowed to fall into decay. 

2Ch 34:12 The men were conscientious in doing their work; their foremen were Jahath and Obadiah, Levites 
descended from Merari, and Zechariah and Meshullam, descended from Kohath, who supervised. The Levites — 
all of whom were skilled instrumentalists- 

2Ch 34:13 were in charge of the carriers and supervised all the workmen at their various jobs, while some of the 
Levites acted as secretaries, book-keepers and gatekeepers. 

2Ch 34:14 While bringing out the money contributed to the Temple of Yahweh, the priest Hilkiah found the book 
of the Law of Yahweh given through Moses. 

2Ch 34:15 Hilkiah then said to Shaphan the secretary, “I have found the Book of the Law in the Temple of 
Yahweh”. And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan. 

2Ch 34:16 Shaphan took the book to the king, reporting furthermore to him as follows, “Your servants have done 
everything entrusted to them. 

2Ch 34:17 They have melted down the silver which was in the Temple of Yahweh and have handed it over to 
the supervisors and the masters of works”. 

2Ch 34:18 Shaphan the secretary also informed the king, “The priest Hilkiah has given me a book”; and 
Shaphan read extracts from it in the king’s presence. 

2Ch 34:19 On hearing the words of the Law, the king tore his clothes. 

2Ch 34:20 Then the king gave the following order to Hilkiah, Ahikam son of Shaphan, Abdon son of Micah, 
Shaphan the secretary and Asaiah the king’s minister, 

2Ch 34:21 “Go and consult Yahweh on behalf of me and of those left in Israel and Judah about the words of the 
book that has been discovered: for Yahweh’s furious wrath has been pouring down on us because our ancestors 
did not obey the word of Yahweh by doing what this book says they ought to have done”. 

2Ch 34:22 Hilkiah and those whom the king had designated went to the prophetess Huldah wife of Shallum, son 
of Tokhath, son of Hasrah, the keeper of the wardrobe; she lived in Jerusalem in the new town. They spoke to 
her about this, 

2Ch 34:23 and she replied, “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘To the man who sent you to me reply: 

2Ch 34:24 Yahweh says this: I am going to bring disaster on this place and the people who live in it — all the 
curses set down in the book read in the king of Judah’s presence. 

2Ch 34:25 Because they have abandoned me and burnt incense to other gods, so as to provoke my anger by 
their every action, my wrath is about to be poured down on this place, and nothing can stop it. 

2Ch 34:26 As for the king of Judah who sent you to consult Yahweh, say this to him: Yahweh, God of Israel, 
says this: The words you have heard … 

2Ch 34:27 But since your heart has been touched and you have humbled yourself before God on hearing what 
he has decreed against this place and the people who live in it, have torn your clothes and wept before me, I too 
have heard’ — Yahweh says this. 

2Ch 34:28 ‘Look, when I gather you to your ancestors, you will be gathered into your grave in peace; you will 
not live to see the great disaster that I am going to bring on this place and on the people who live in it’”. They 
took this answer to the king. 

2Ch 34:29 The king then had all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem summoned, 

2Ch 34:30 and the king went up to the temple of Yahweh, with all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, priests, Levites and all the people, high and low. In their hearing he read out the entire contents of 
the Book of the Covenant discovered in the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 34:31 The king then, standing on the dais, bound himself by the covenant before Yahweh, to follow 
Yahweh, to keep his commandments, decrees and laws with all his heart and soul and to carry out the terms of 
the covenant as written in this book. 

2Ch 34:32 He made all those present in Jerusalem and Benjamin pledge their allegiance to it. The citizens of 
Jerusalem took action in keeping with the covenant of God, the God of their ancestors, 

2Ch 34:33 while Josiah removed all the abominations throughout the territories belonging to the Israelites and 
required all inhabitants of Israel to serve Yahweh their God; throughout his lifetime they did not deviate from 
following Yahweh, God of their ancestors. 

2Ch 35:1 Josiah then celebrated a Passover to Yahweh in Jerusalem. The Passover victims were slaughtered 
on the fourteenth day of the first month. 

2Ch 35:2 He assigned the priests to their posts, encouraging them to do their duty in the Temple of Yahweh. 

2Ch 35:3 Then he said to the Levites, who had understanding for all Israel and were consecrated to Yahweh, 



“Put the sacred ark in the Temple built by Solomon son of David, king of Israel. You need not carry it about on 
your shoulders any more. Now serve Yahweh your God and Israel his people! 

2Ch 35:4 Prepare yourselves by families according to your orders, as laid down in the decree of David king of 
Israel and that of Solomon his son, 

2Ch 35:5 and take up positions in the sanctuary corresponding to the family divisions of your brothers the laity, 
so that there are Levites for each family division. 

2Ch 35:6 Slaughter the Passover, sanctify yourselves and prepare it so that your brothers can observe it in the 
way the word of Yahweh through Moses requires”. 

2Ch 35:7 For the laity Josiah provided small livestock, that is, lambs and young goats — everything for the 
Passover offerings for all who attended — to the number of thirty thousand, as well as three thousand bullocks; 
these were from the king’s own possessions. 

2Ch 35:8 His officials also made voluntary contributions for the people, the priests and the Levites; and Hilkiah, 
Zechariah and Jehiel, the chiefs of the Temple of God, gave two thousand six hundred lambs and three hundred 
bullocks to the priests for the Passover offerings; 

2Ch 35:9 while Conaniah, Shemaiah, Nethanel his brother, Hashabiah, Jeiel and Jozabad, the head Levites, 
provided five thousand lambs and five hundred bullocks as Passover offerings for the Levites. 

2Ch 35:10 So the service was arranged, the priests stood in their places and the Levites in their orders as the 
king had commanded. 

2Ch 35:1 1 Then they slaughtered the Passover victims and while the priests sprinkled the blood as they 
received it from the Levites, the latter did the skinning. 

2Ch 35:12 Next they put the burnt offering aside for presentation to the family divisions of the laity, so that they 
could offer it to Yahweh in the way prescribed in the Book of Moses; they did the same with the bullocks. 

2Ch 35:13 They roasted the Passover victim over an open fire in accordance with the regulation and boiled the 
consecrated offerings in pots, kettles and pans, which they then distributed to all the laity as quickly as they 
could. 

2Ch 35:14 Afterwards they provided for themselves and the priests, since the Aaronite priests were kept busy till 
nightfall making the burnt offerings and offering the fat; that was why the Levites prepared the Passover for 
themselves and for the Aaronite priests. 

2Ch 35:15 The Asaphite singers were at their places, in accordance with the command of David and Asaph, 
Heman and Jeduthun the king’s seer; so were the gatekeepers at each gate. Because they could not leave their 
duties, their brothers the Levites prepared the Passover for them. 

2Ch 35:16 So the whole service of Yahweh was arranged that day to celebrate the Passover and to bring burnt 
offerings on the altar of Yahweh, in accordance with King Josiah’s command. 

2Ch 35:17 On that occasion the Israelites who were present celebrated the Passover and the feast of 
Unleavened Bread for seven days. 

2Ch 35:18 No Passover like this one had ever been celebrated in Israel since the days of the prophet Samuel, 
nor had any of the kings of Israel ever celebrated a Passover like the one celebrated by Josiah, the priests, the 
Levites, all Judah and Israel who were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

2Ch 35:19 This Passover was celebrated in the eighteenth year of Josiah’s reign. 

2Ch 35:20 After all this, when Josiah had provided for the Temple, Necho king of Egypt advanced to give battle 

at Carchemish on the Euphrates and Josiah went to intercept him. 

2Ch 35:21 Necho however sent him messengers to say, “Why be concerned about me, king of Judah? I have 
not come today to attack you; my quarrel is with another dynasty. God has commanded me to move quickly, so 
keep well clear of the god who is with me!”. 

2Ch 35:22 But Josiah was not to be deflected from his determination to fight him, and would not listen to 

Necho’s words, which came from the mouth of God. He gave battle in the plain of Megiddo. 

2Ch 35:23 The archers shot King Josiah. The king then said to his retainers, “Take me away; I am badly 
wounded”. 

2Ch 35:24 So his retainers lifted him out of his own chariot, transferred him to one which he had in reserve and 
brought him to Jerusalem, where he died and was buried in the tombs of his ancestors. All Judah and Jerusalem 
held mourning for Josiah. 

2Ch 35:25 Jeremiah composed a lament for Josiah and all the male and female singers to this day lament 
Josiah in their dirges; they have made it a rule in Israel; they are recorded in the Lamentations. 

2Ch 35:26 The rest of the history of Josiah, his deeds of faithful love conforming to what is prescribed in the 
Law of Yahweh, 

2Ch 35:27 his history from first to last, are recorded in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah. 

2Ch 36:1 The people of the land then took Jehoahaz son of Josiah and proclaimed him king of Jerusalem in 
succession to his father. 

2Ch 36:2 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for three months in 



Jerusalem. 

2Ch 36:3 The king of Egypt deposed him in Jerusalem and imposed a levy of a hundred talents of silver and 
one talent of gold on the country. 

2Ch 36:4 The king of Egypt then made his brother Eliakim king of Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name 
to Jehoiakim. Carrying off his brother Jehoahaz, Necho took him to Egypt. 

2Ch 36:5 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for eleven years in 
Jerusalem. He did what is displeasing to Yahweh his God. 

2Ch 36:6 Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon attacked him, loaded him with chains and took him to Babylon. 

2Ch 36:7 To Babylon Nebuchadnezzar also took some of the objects belonging to the Temple of Yahweh and 
put them in his palace in Babylon. 

2Ch 36:8 The rest of the history of Jehoiakim, the shameful things that he did and what happened to him in 
consequence, these are recorded in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah. His son Jehoiachin succeeded 
him. 

2Ch 36:9 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for three months and 
ten days in Jerusalem. He did what is displeasing to Yahweh. 

2Ch 36:10 At the turn of the year, King Nebuchadnezzar sent for him and had him taken to Babylon, with the 
valuables belonging to the Temple of Yahweh, and made his brother Zedekiah king of Judah and Jerusalem. 

2Ch 36:1 1 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for eleven years in 
Jerusalem. 

2Ch 36:12 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh his God. He did not listen humbly to the prophet Jeremiah who 
spoke for Yahweh. 

2Ch 36:13 Furthermore, he rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar who had made him swear allegiance to him 
by God. He became stubborn, and obstinately refused to return to Yahweh, God of Israel. 

2Ch 36:14 Furthermore, all the leaders of Judah, the priests and the people too, added infidelity to infidelity, 
copying all the shameful practices of the nations and defiling the Temple of Yahweh which he himself had 
consecrated in Jerusalem. 

2Ch 36:15 Yahweh, God of their ancestors, continuously sent them word through his messengers because he 
felt sorry for his people and his dwelling, 

2Ch 36:16 but they ridiculed the messengers of God, they despised his words, they laughed at his prophets, 
until Yahweh’s wrath with his people became so fierce that there was no further remedy. 

2Ch 36:17 So against them he summoned the king of the Chaldaeans and he put their young men to the sword 
within the very building of their Temple, not sparing young man or girl, or the old and infirm; he put them all at his 
mercy. 

2Ch 36:18 All the things belonging to the Temple of God, whether large or small, the treasures of the Temple of 
Yahweh, the treasures of the king and his officials, everything he took to Babylon. 

2Ch 36:19 He burned down the temple of God, demolished the walls of Jerusalem, burned all its palaces to the 
ground and destroyed everything of value in it. 

2Ch 36:20 And those who had escaped the sword he deported to Babylon, where they were enslaved by him 
and his descendants until the rise of the kingdom of Persia, 

2Ch 36:21 to fulfil Yahweh’s prophecy through Jeremiah: Until the country has paid off its Sabbaths, it will lie 
fallow for all the days of its desolation — until the seventy years are complete. 

2Ch 36:22 In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia — to fulfil the word of Yahweh through Jeremiah — Yahweh 
roused the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia to issue a proclamation and to have it publicly displayed throughout his 
kingdom: 

2Ch 36:23 “Cyrus king of Persia says this, ‘Yahweh, the God of Heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the 
earth and has appointed me to build him a Temple in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoëver there is among you 
of all his people, may his God be with him! Let him go up’”. 

Ezr 1:1 In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia — to fulfil the word of Yahweh spoken through Jeremiah -Yahweh 
roused the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia to issue a proclamation and to have it publicly displayed throughout his 
kingdom: 

Ezr 1 :2 “Cyrus king of Persia says this, ‘Yahweh, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth 
and has appointed me to build him a Temple in Jerusalem, in Judah. 

Ezr 1 :3 Whoëver among you belongs to the full tally of his people, may his God be with him! Let him go up to 
Jerusalem, in Judah, and build the Temple of Yahweh, God of Israel, who is the God in Jerusalem. 

Ezr 1 :4 And let each survivor, wherever he lives, be helped by the people of his locality with silver, gold, 
equipment and riding beasts, as well as voluntary offerings for the Temple of God which is in Jerusalem’”. 

Ezr 1 :5 Then the heads of families of Judah and of Benjamin, the priests and the Levites, in fact all whose spirit 
had been roused by God, prepared to go and rebuild the Temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem; 

Ezr 1 :6 and all their neighbours gave them every kind of help: silver, gold, equipment, riding beasts and 



valuable presents, in addition to their voluntary offerings. 

Ezr 1 :7 Furthermore, King Cyrus handed over the articles belonging to the Temple of Yahweh which 
Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem and put in the temple of his god. 

Ezr 1 :8 Cyrus king of Persia handed them over to Mithredath the treasurer who checked them out to 
Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah. 

Ezr 1 :9 The inventory was as follows: thirty gold dishes; one thousand silver dishes, twenty-nine repaired; 

Ezr 1:10 thirty gold bowls; a thousand silver bowls, four hundred and ten damaged; one thousand other articles. 
Ezr 1:11 In all, five thousand four hundred articles of gold and silver. Sheshbazzar took all these with him when 
he led the exiles back from Babylon to Jerusalem. 

Ezr 2:1 These were the people of the province who returned from the captivity of the Exile, those whom 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had deported to Babylon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to 
his own town. 

Ezr 2:2 They were the ones who arrived with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Nahamani, 
Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum and Baanah. The number of the men of the people of the country of 
Israel: 

Ezr 2:3 sons of Parosh, two thousand one hundred and seventy-two; 

Ezr 2:4 sons of Shephatiah, three hundred and seventy-two; 

Ezr 2:5 sons of Arah, seven hundred and seventy-five; 

Ezr 2:6 sons of Pahath-Moab, that is to say the sons of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and 
twelve; 

Ezr 2:7 sons of Elam, one thousand two hundred and fifty-four; 

Ezr 2:8 sons of Zattu, nine hundred and forty-five; 

Ezr 2:9 sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty; 

Ezr 2:10 sons of Bani, six hundred and forty-two; 

Ezr 2:1 1 sons of Bebai, six hundred and twenty-three; 

Ezr 2:12 sons of Azgad, one thousand two hundred and twenty-two; 

Ezr 2:13 sons of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty-six; 

Ezr 2:14 sons of Bigvai, two thousand and fifty-six; 

Ezr 2:15 sons of Adin, four hundred and fifty-four; 

Ezr 2:16 sons of Ater, that is to say of Hezekiah, ninety-eight; 

Ezr 2:17 sons of Bezai, three hundred and twenty-three; 

Ezr 2:18 sons of Jorah, one hundred and twelve; 

Ezr 2:19 sons of Hashum, two hundred and twenty-three; 

Ezr 2:20 sons of Gibbar, ninety-five; 

Ezr 2:21 sons of Bethlehem, one hundred and twenty-three; 

Ezr 2:22 men of Netophah, fifty-six; 

Ezr 2:23 men of Anathoth, one hundred and twenty-eight; 

Ezr 2:24 sons of Azmaveth, forty-two; 

Ezr 2:25 sons of Kiriath-Jearim, Chephirah and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three; 

Ezr 2:26 sons of Ramah and Geba, six hundred and twenty-one; 

Ezr 2:27 men of Michmas, one hundred and twenty-two; 

Ezr 2:28 men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred and twenty-three; 

Ezr 2:29 sons of Nebo, fifty-two; 

Ezr 2:30 of Magbish, one hundred and fifty-six; 

Ezr 2:31 sons of the other Elam, one thousand two hundred and fifty-four; 

Ezr 2:32 sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty; 

Ezr 2:33 sons of Lod, Hadid and Ono, seven hundred and twenty-five; 

Ezr 2:34 sons of Jericho, three hundred and forty-five; 

Ezr 2:35 sons of Senaah, three thousand six hundred and thirty. 

Ezr 2:36 The priests: sons of Jedaiah, of the House of Jeshua, nine hundred and seventy-three; 

Ezr 2:37 sons of Immer, one thousand and fifty-two; 

Ezr 2:38 sons of Pashhur, one thousand two hundred and forty-seven; 

Ezr 2:39 sons of Harim, one thousand and seventeen. 

Ezr 2:40 The Levites: sons of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the line of Hodaviah, seventy-four. 

Ezr 2:41 The singers: sons of Asaph, one hundred and twenty-eight. 

Ezr 2:42 The sons of the gatekeepers: sons of Shallum, sons of Ater, sons of Talmon, sons of Akkub, sons of 
Hatita, sons of Shobai: in all, one hundred and thirty-nine. 

Ezr 2:43 The temple slaves: sons of Ziha, sons of Hasupha, sons of Tabbaoth, 

Ezr 2:44 sons of Keros, sons of Siaha, sons of Padon, 



Ezr 2:45 sons of Lebanah, sons of Hagabah, sons of Akkub, 

Ezr 2:46 sons of Hagab, sons of Shamlai, sons of Hanan, 

Ezr 2:47 sons of Giddel, sons of Gahar, sons of Reaiah, 

Ezr 2:48 sons of Rezin, sons of Nekoda, sons of Gazzam, 

Ezr 2:49 sons of Uzza, sons of Paseah, sons of Besai, 

Ezr 2:50 sons of Asnah, sons of the Meunites, sons of the Nephisites, 

Ezr 2:51 sons of Bakbuk, sons of Hakupha, sons of Harhur, 

Ezr 2:52 sons of Bazluth, sons of Mehida, sons of Harsha, 

Ezr 2:53 sons of Barkos, sons of Sisera, sons of Temah, 

Ezr 2:54 sons of Neziah, sons of Hatipha. 

Ezr 2:55 The sons of Solomon’s slaves: sons of Sotai, sons of Hassophereth, sons of Peruda, 

Ezr 2:56 sons of Jaalah, sons of Darkon, sons of Giddel, 

Ezr 2:57 sons of Shephatiah, sons of Hattil, sons of Pochereth-ha-Zebaim, sons of Ami. 

Ezr 2:58 The total of the temple slaves and the sons of Solomon’s slaves: three hundred and ninety-two. 

Ezr 2:59 The following, who came from Tel-Melah, Tel-Harsha, Cherub, Addan and Immer, could not prove that 
their families and ancestry were of Israelite origin: 

Ezr 2:60 the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda: six hundred and fifty-two. 

Ezr 2:61 And among the sons of the priests: the sons of Habaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai — 
who had married one of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, whose name he adopted. 

Ezr 2:62 These had looked for their entries in the official genealogies but were not to be found there, and were 
hence disqualified from the priesthood. 

Ezr 2:63 Consequently, His Excellency forbade them to eat any of the consecrated food until a priest appeared 
who could consult urim and thummim. 

Ezr 2:64 The whole assembly numbered forty-two thousand, three hundred and sixty people, 

Ezr 2:65 not counting their male and female slaves to the number of seven thousand three hundred and thirty- 
seven. They also had two hundred male and female singers. 

Ezr 2:66 Their horses numbered seven hundred and thirty-six, their mules two hundred and forty-five, 

Ezr 2:67 their camels four hundred and thirty-five and their donkeys six thousand seven hundred and twenty. 

Ezr 2:68 When they arrived at the Temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem, a certain number of heads of families made 
voluntary offerings for the Temple of God, for its rebuilding on its site. 

Ezr 2:69 In accordance with their means they gave sixty-one thousand gold drachmas, five thousand silver 
minas and one hundred priestly robes to the sacred treasury. 

Ezr 2:70 The priests, the Levites and some of the people settled in Jerusalem; the singers, the gatekeepers and 
the temple slaves in their appropriate towns; and all the other Israelites in their own towns. 

Ezr 3:1 When the seventh month came after the Israelites had been resettled in their towns, the people 
gathered as one person in Jerusalem. 

Ezr 3:2 Then Jeshua son of Jozadak, with his brother priests, and Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, with his brothers, 
set about rebuilding the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings on it as prescribed in the Law of Moses 
man of God. 

Ezr 3:3 They erected the altar on its old site, despite their fear of the people of the country, and on it they 
presented burnt offerings to Yahweh, burnt offerings morning and evening; 

Ezr 3:4 they celebrated the feast of Shelters as prescribed, offering daily the number of burnt offerings required 
from day to day, 

Ezr 3:5 and in addition presented the continual burnt offerings prescribed for the Sabbaths, for the New Moons 
and for all the festivals sacred to Yahweh, as well as those voluntary offerings made by individuals to Yahweh. 
Ezr 3:6 From the first day of the seventh month they began presenting burnt offerings to Yahweh, though the 
foundations of the Temple of Yahweh had not yet been laid. 

Ezr 3:7 They also contributed money for the masons and carpenters, and food, drink and oil for the Sidonians 
and Tyrians for bringing cedar wood from Lebanon by sea to Jaffa, for which Cyrus king of Persia had given 
permission. 

Ezr 3:8 It was in the second month of the second year after their arrival at the Temple of God in Jerusalem that 
Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Jeshua son of Jozadak, with the rest of their brothers, the priests, the Levites 
and all the people who had returned to Jerusalem from captivity, began the work by appointing some of the 
Levites who were twenty years old or more to superintend the work on the Temple of Yahweh. 

Ezr 3:9 The Levites, Jeshua, his sons and his brothers, with Kadmiel, Binnui and his sons, the sons of 
Hodaviah, agreed to superintend the men working on the Temple of God. 

Ezr 3:10 When the builders had laid the foundations of the Temple of Yahweh, the priests in their robes stood 
forward with trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Asaph, with cymbals, to praise Yahweh according to the 
ordinances of David king of Israel. 



Ezr 3:1 1 They chanted praise and thanksgiving to Yahweh because for Israel, they said, “he is good, and 
everlasting in his faithful love”. Then all the people raised a mighty shout of praise to Yahweh, since the 
foundations of the Temple of Yahweh had now been laid. 

Ezr 3:12 Many of the older priests, Levites and heads of families, who had seen the first temple, wept very 
loudly when the foundations of this one were laid before their eyes, but many others shouted aloud for joy, 

Ezr 3:13 so that nobody could distinguish the noise of the joyful shout from the noise of the people’s weeping; 
for the people shouted so loudly that the noise could be heard far away. 

Ezr 4:1 When the enemies of Judah and Benjamin heard that the exiles were building the Temple of Yahweh, 
God of Israel, 

Ezr 4:2 they came to Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the heads of families and said, “Let us help you build, for we 
resort to your God as you do and we have been sacrificing to him since the time of Esarhaddon king of Assyria, 
who brought us here”. 

Ezr 4:3 Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and the other heads of Israelite families replied, “It is out of the question that you 
should join us in building a Temple for our God. We shall build for Yahweh, God of Israel, on our own, as King 
Cyrus king of Persia has commanded us”. 

Ezr 4:4 The people of the country then set about demoralising the people of Judah and deterring them from 
building; 

Ezr 4:5 they also bribed counsellors against them to frustrate their purpose throughout the lifetime of Cyrus king 
of Persia right on into the reign of Darius king of Persia. 

Ezr 4:6 In the reign of Xerxes, at the beginning of his reign, they drew up an accusation against the inhabitants 
of Judah and Jerusalem. 

Ezr 4:7 In the days of Artaxerxes, Mithredath, Tabeel and their other associates wrote to Artaxerxes king of 
Persia against Jerusalem; the text of the letter was written in Aramaic writing and dialect. 

Ezr 4:8 Then Rehum the governor and Shimshai the secretary wrote a letter to King Artaxerxes, denouncing 
Jerusalem as follows: 

Ezr 4:9 “From Rehum the governor and Shimshai the secretary and their other associates, the judges, the 
legates, the Persian officials, the people of Uruk, Babylon and Susa — that is, the Elamites- 
Ezr 4:10 and the other peoples whom the great and illustrious Ashurbanipal deported and settled in the towns of 
Samaria and in the rest of Transeuphrates”. 

Ezr 4:1 1 This is the text of the letter which they sent him: “To King Artaxerxes, from your servants the people of 
Transeuphrates: 

Ezr 4:12 “May the king now please be informed that the Jews, who have come up from you to us, have arrived 
in Jerusalem and are rebuilding the rebellious and evil city; they have begun rebuilding the walls and are laying 
the foundations; 

Ezr 4:13 and now the king should be informed that once this city is rebuilt and the walls are restored, they will 
refuse to pay tribute, tax or toll, thus the king will incur a loss; 

Ezr 4:14 and now, because we eat the palace salt, it is not proper for us to see this affront offered to the king; 
we therefore send this information to the king 

Ezr 4:15 so that a search may be made in the archives of your ancestors: in which archives you will find and 
learn that this city is a rebellious city, the bane of kings and provinces, and that sedition has been stirred up 
there from ancient times; that is why this city was destroyed. 

Ezr 4:16 We inform the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are restored, you will soon have no territories 
left in Transeuphrates”. 

Ezr 4:17 The king sent this reply: “To Rehum the governor, to Shimshai the secretary, and to their other 
associates resident in Samaria and elsewhere in Transeuphrates: Greetings! 

Ezr 4:18 “And now, the document which you sent us has been accurately translated for me, 

Ezr 4:19 and by my orders search has been made, and it has been found that this city has rebelled against the 
kings in the past and that revolt and sedition have been contrived in it; 

Ezr 4:20 and that powerful kings have reigned in Jerusalem, governing the whole of Transeuphrates and 
exacting tribute, tax and toll; 

Ezr 4:21 now give orders for these men to cease work; this city is not to be rebuilt until I give the order. 

Ezr 4:22 Beware of acting negligently in this matter. Why should the harm grow, to endanger the king?”. 

Ezr 4:23 As soon as the text of King Artaxerxes’ document had been read to Rehum the governor, Shimshai the 
secretary and their associates, they hurried to the Jews in Jerusalem and stopped their work by force of arms. 
Ezr 4:24 Work on the Temple of God in Jerusalem then ceased, and was discontinued until the second year of 
the reign of Darius King of Persia. 

Ezr 5:1 When the prophets Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and 
Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel who was over them, 

Ezr 5:2 Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Jeshua son of Jozadak began rebuilding the Temple of God in 



Jerusalem; with them were the prophets of God, supporting them. 

Ezr 5:3 It was then that Tattenai governor of Transeuphrates, Shethar-Bozenai and their associates came to 
them and asked, “Who gave you the order to rebuild this Temple and complete this structure? 

Ezr 5:4 What are the names of the men putting up this building?”. 

Ezr 5:5 But the eyes of their God were watching over the elders of the Jews, so they were not forced to stop 
until a report could reach Darius and an official reply about the matter could be received from him. 

Ezr 5:6 A copy of the letter which Tattenai, governor of Transeuphrates, Shethar-Bozenai and his associates, 
the officials in Transeuphrates, sent to King Darius. 

Ezr 5:7 They sent him a report which ran as follows: “To King Darius, hearty greetings! 

Ezr 5:8 “The king should be informed that we went to the province of Judah, to the Temple of the great God, 
which is being rebuilt with large stones; beams are being embedded in the walls; the work is being carried out 
energetically and is making good progress. 

Ezr 5:9 Questioning these elders, we asked them, ‘Who gave you permission to rebuild this Temple and 
complete this structure?’. 

Ezr 5:10 We also asked them their names, to inform you, so that we could record the names of the men who 
were their leaders. 

Ezr 5:1 1 “They gave us the following answer, ‘We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth; we are 
rebuilding the Temple built many years ago, which a great king of Israel had built and completed. 

Ezr 5:12 But because our ancestors angered the God of heaven, he handed them over to Nebuchadnezzar the 
Chaldaean king of Babylon who destroyed this Temple and deported the people to Babylon. 

Ezr 5:13 In the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, however, King Cyrus issued an official order that this Temple 
of God should be rebuilt; 

Ezr 5:14 furthermore, those gold and silver articles belonging to the Temple of God, which Nebuchadnezzar had 
removed from the temple in Jerusalem and brought to the temple of Babylon, King Cyrus in turn removed from 
the temple of Babylon and handed back to a certain Sheshbazzar whom he had appointed governor. 

Ezr 5:15 He said to him, “Take these articles; go and return them to the Temple which is in Jerusalem and let 
the Temple of God be rebuilt on its original site;” 

Ezr 5:16 this Sheshbazzar then came and laid the foundations of the Temple of God in Jerusalem, and it has 
been under construction ever since, and is not yet finished’. 

Ezr 5:17 “Hence, if it please the king, let search be made in the royal treasuries in Babylon, to find out if it is true 
that an official order was issued by King Cyrus for this temple of God in Jerusalem to be rebuilt; and let the king’s 
decision on this matter be sent to us”. 

Ezr 6:1 Then, on the order of King Darius, search was made in the archives deposited in the treasuries in 
Babylon 

Ezr 6:2 and a scroll was found in the fortress of Ecbatana, which ran as follows: “Memorandum. 

Ezr 6:3 “In the first year of King Cyrus, King Cyrus issued this order: ‘Temple of God in Jerusalem. ‘The Temple 
is to be rebuilt as a place of offering sacrifice and its foundations retained. Its height is to be sixty cubits, its width 
sixty cubits, 

Ezr 6:4 with three layers of large stones and one layer of timber. The cost is to be met by the royal treasury. 

Ezr 6:5 Furthermore, the gold and silver articles belonging to the Temple of God which Nebuchadnezzar took 
from the Temple in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon are to be given back and returned to the temple in 
Jerusalem, each to its proper place, and deposited in the Temple of God’. 

Ezr 6:6 “Hence, Tattenai governor of Transeuphrates, Shethar-Bozenai and your associates, the officials of 
Transeuphrates, keep away from there! 

Ezr 6:7 Leave the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews alone, to get on with their work on that 
Temple of God; they are permitted to rebuild that Temple of God on that site. 

Ezr 6:8 And herewith are my instructions as to how you will assist these elders of the Jews in the rebuilding of 
that Temple of God: the cost is to be paid in full to these men from the royal revenue, that is, from the taxes of 
Transeuphrates, and without interruption. 

Ezr 6:9 And whatever is required — young bulls, rams, lambs for burnt offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, 
salt, wine, oil, as the priests in Jerusalem request — is to be given them day by day without fail, 

Ezr 6:10 so that they may offer sacrifices acceptable to the God of heaven and pray for the life of the king and 
his sons. 

Ezr 6:1 1 Furthermore I have issued an instruction that if anyone disobeys this order, a beam is to be torn from 
his house, he is to be impaled on it and his house is to be reduced to a rubbish-heap for his offence; 

Ezr 6:12 and may the God who has caused his name to live there overthrow the king of any people who dares 
to defy this and destroy that Temple of God in Jerusalem! I, Darius, have issued this order. Let it be punctiliously 
obeyed!”. 

Ezr 6:13 Tattenai governor of Transeuphrates, Shethar-Bozenai and their associates punctiliously obeyed the 



instructions sent by King Darius; 

Ezr 6:14 and the elders of the Jews made good progress over their building, thanks to the prophetic activity of 
the prophet Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo, completing the reconstruction in accordance with the command 
of the God of Israel and the order of Cyrus and of Darius. 

Ezr 6:15 This Temple was completed on the twenty-third day of the month of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign 
of King Darius. 

Ezr 6:16 The Israelites — the priests, the Levites and the remainder of the exiles - joyfully celebrated the 
dedication of this Temple of God; 

Ezr 6:17 for the dedication of this Temple of God they offered one hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four 
hundred lambs and, as a sin offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, corresponding to the number of the tribes of 
Israel. 

Ezr 6:18 Then they installed the priests in their orders and the Levites in their positions for the ministry of the 
Temple of God in Jerusalem, as prescribed in the Book of Moses. 

Ezr 6:19 The exiles celebrated the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month. 

Ezr 6:20 The Levites, as one man, had purified themselves; all were pure, so they sacrificed the Passover for all 
the exiles, for their brothers the priests and for themselves. 

Ezr 6:21 So the Israelites who had returned from exile and all those who had renounced the filthy practices of 
the people of the country to join them in resorting to Yahweh, God of Israel, ate the Passover. 

Ezr 6:22 For seven days they joyfully celebrated the feast of Unleavened Bread, for Yahweh had given them 
cause to rejoice, having moved the heart of the king of Assyria in their favour to support them in their work on the 
Temple of God, the God of Israel. 

Ezr 7:1 After these events, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra son of Seraiah, son of Azariah, son of 
Hilkiah, 

Ezr 7:2 son of Shallum, son of Zadok, son of Ahitub, 

Ezr 7:3 son of Amariah, son of Azariah, son of Meraioth, 

Ezr 7:4 son ofZerahiah, son of Uzzi, son of Bukki, 

Ezr 7:5 son of Abishua, son of Phinehas, son of Eleazar, son of the chief priest Aaron- 

Ezr 7:6 this Ezra came up from Babylon. He was a scribe versed in the Law of Moses, which Yahweh, God of 

Israel, had given. The king gave him everything that he asked for, since the hand of Yahweh his God was over 

him. 

Ezr 7:7 A number of Israelites, priests, Levites, singers, gatekeepers and temple slaves went up to Jerusalem in 
the seventh year of the reign of King Artaxerxes. 

Ezr 7:8 Ezra arrived in Jerusalem in the fifth month, in the seventh year of the king’s reign; 

Ezr 7:9 for he had ordered the departure from Babylon on the first day of the first month, and he arrived in 
Jerusalem on the first day of the fifth month, since the kindly hand of his God was over him. 

Ezr 7:10 For Ezra had devoted himself to studying the Law of Yahweh so as to put into practice and teach its 
statutes and rulings. 

Ezr 7:1 1 This is the text of the document which King Artaxerxes gave to Ezra, the priest-scribe, a student of 
matters pertaining to Yahweh’s commandments and statutes relating to Israel: 

Ezr 7:12 “Artaxerxes, king of kings, to the priest Ezra, Secretary of the Law of the God of heaven: greetings! 

Ezr 7:13 “Now here are my orders. All members of the people of Israel in my kingdom, including their priests and 
Levites, who freely choose to go to Jerusalem, may go with you, 

Ezr 7:14 for you are being sent by the king and his seven counsellors to investigate how the Law of your God, in 
which you are expert, is being applied in Judah and Jerusalem, 

Ezr 7:15 and to transport the silver and gold which the king and his counsellors have voluntarily offered to the 
God of Israel who resides in Jerusalem, 

Ezr 7:16 as well as all the silver and gold which you receive throughout the province of Babylon and the 
voluntary offerings freely contributed by the people and the priests for the Temple of their God in Jerusalem. 

Ezr 7:17 “This money you will punctiliously use for the purchase of bulls, rams, lambs and the materials for the 
oblations and libations which go with them, offering these on the altar of the Temple of your God in Jerusalem, 
Ezr 7:18 and using the remainder of the silver and gold in accordance with the will of your God as you and your 
brothers may think fit. 

Ezr 7:19 “You will deliver the articles which have been given you for the ministry of the Temple of your God, to 
the God of Jerusalem, 

Ezr 7:20 and whatever else is needed and you are obliged to supply for the Temple of your God, you will supply 
from the royal treasury. 

Ezr 7:21 “I, King Artaxerxes, have issued the following instruction to all the treasurers of Transeuphrates: 
Whatever the priest Ezra, Secretary of the Law of the God of heaven, may request of you is to be punctiliously 
complied with: 



Ezr 7:22 up to one hundred talents of silver, one hundred kor of wheat, one hundred bat of wine, one hundred 
bat of oil, and unlimited salt. 

Ezr 7:23 Whatever the God of heaven demands for the Temple of the God of heaven must be diligently 
provided; why should retribution come on the realm of the king and of his sons? 

Ezr 7 :24 You are further informed that it is against the law to impose tribute, tax or toll on any of the priests, 
Levites, singers, gatekeepers, temple slaves or other servants of this temple of God. 

Ezr 7:25 “And you, Ezra, by virtue of the wisdom of your God, which you possess, are to appoint magistrates 
and scribes to administer justice for the whole people of Transeuphrates, that is, for all who know the Law of 
your God; and you are to teach it to those who do not know it. 

Ezr 7 :26 And on anyone who will not comply with the Law of your God and the Law of the king let sentence be 
swiftly executed, whether it be death, banishment, fine or imprisonment”. 

Ezr 7:27 Blessed be Yahweh, God of our ancestors, who moved the king’s heart in this way to restore the 
beauty of the Temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem, 

Ezr 7:28 won for me the faithful love of the king, his counsellors and all the most powerful of the king’s officials! 
Taking heart since the hand of Yahweh my God was over me, I assembled those Israelite heads of families who 
were to go with me. 

Ezr 8:1 These, with their genealogies, were the heads of families who set out from Babylon with me in the reign 
of King Artaxerxes: 

Ezr 8:2 Of the sons of Phinehas: Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar: Daniel; of the sons of David: Hattush 

Ezr 8:3 son of Shechaniah; of the sons of Parosh: Zechariah, and with him a hundred and fifty males officially 

registered; 

Ezr 8:4 of the sons of Pahath-Moab: Elioenai son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males; 

Ezr 8:5 of the sons of Zattu: Shechaniah son of Jahaziel, and with him three hundred males; 

Ezr 8:6 of the sons of Adin: Ebed son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males; 

Ezr 8:7 of the sons of Elam: Jeshaiah son of Athaliah, and with him seventy males; 

Ezr 8:8 of the sons of Shephatiah: Zebadiah son of Michael, and with him eighty males; 

Ezr 8:9 of the sons of Joab: Obadiah son of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males; 

Ezr 8:10 of the sons of Bani: Shelomith son of Josiphiah, and with him a hundred and sixty males; 

Ezr 8:11 of the sons of Bebai: Zechariah son of Bebai, and with him twenty-eight males; 

Ezr 8:12 of the sons of Azgad: Johanan son of Hakkatan, and with him a hundred and ten males; 

Ezr 8:13 of the sons of Adonikam: the younger sons, whose names are: Eliphelet, Jeiel and Shemaiah, and with 
them sixty males; 

Ezr 8:14 and of the sons of Bigvai: Uthai son of Zabud, and with him seventy males. 

Ezr 8:15 I assembled them near the canal which runs to Ahava, where we camped for three days. I noticed 
laymen and priests, but I could not discover any Levites there. 

Ezr 8:16 I then sent for Eliezer, Ariel, Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah and Meshullam, 
judicious men, 

Ezr 8:17 and sent them to Iddo, the leading man of a place called Casiphia; I told them what they were to say to 
Iddo and his kinsmen, living at the place called Casiphia, that is, to provide us with people to serve the Temple of 
our God. 

Ezr 8:18 And because the hand of God was good to us, they sent us a wise man of the sons of Mahli son of 
Levi, son of Israel, a certain Sherebiah with his sons and kinsmen: eighteen men; 

Ezr 8:19 also Hashabiah and with him his brother Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari with his kinsmen and sons: 
twenty men; 

Ezr 8:20 and two hundred and twenty temple slaves — descendants of the temple slaves whom David and the 
princes had assigned to serve the Levites — all of them designated by name. 

Ezr 8:21 There, beside the Ahava Canal, I then proclaimed a fast, to humble ourselves before our God and to 
pray to him for a successful journey for us, our dependants and all our belongings. 

Ezr 8:22 For I should have been ashamed to ask the king for a company of cavalry to protect us from hostile 
people on our road, as we had already said to the king, “The hand of our God is over all who seek him for their 
protection, but his mighty retribution befalls all those who forsake him”. 

Ezr 8:23 So we fasted and pleaded with our God about this, and he heard us. 

Ezr 8:24 I next chose twelve of the leading priests, and also Sherebiah and Hashabiah with ten of their kinsmen. 
Ezr 8:25 To them I weighed out the silver, the gold and the utensils, the contributions which the king, his 
counsellors, his notables and all the Israelites there present had made for the Temple of our God. 

Ezr 8:26 To them I weighed out and handed over six hundred and fifty talents of silver, one hundred utensils of 
silver valued at two talents, one hundred talents of gold, 

Ezr 8:27 twenty golden bowls valued at a thousand darics and two utensils of fine burnished copper as precious 
as gold. 



Ezr 8:28 I said to them, “You are consecrated to Yahweh; these utensils are consecrated too; the silver and gold 
are a voluntary offering to Yahweh, God of your ancestors. 

Ezr 8:29 Guard them carefully until you weigh them out to the leading priests, the Levites, and the heads of 
families of Israel in Jerusalem in the rooms of the Temple of Yahweh”. 

Ezr 8:30 The priests and Levites then took charge of the silver, the gold and the utensils thus weighed, to bring 
them to Jerusalem to the Temple of our God. 

Ezr 8:31 On the twelfth day of the first month we left the Ahava Canal to make our way to Jerusalem; the hand 
of our God was over us and protected us from enemies and surprise attacks on our way. 

Ezr 8:32 When we arrived in Jerusalem, we rested for three days. 

Ezr 8:33 On the fourth day the silver, the gold and the utensils were weighed in the Temple of our God and 
handed over to the priest Meremoth son of Uriah and, with him, Eleazar son of Phinehas; with them were the 
Levites Jozabad son of Jeshua and Noadiah son of Binnui. 

Ezr 8:34 By number and weight all was there. The total weight was recorded at the same time. 

Ezr 8:35 When the exiles arrived from their captivity, they offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel — twelve 
bulls on behalf of all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-two lambs, and as a sin offering twelve he-goats: the whole 
of this as a burnt offering to Yahweh. 

Ezr 8:36 They also delivered the king’s instructions to the king’s satraps and the governors of Transeuphrates, 
who then supported the people and the Temple of God. 

Ezr 9:1 Once this was done, the officials approached me to say, “The people of Israel, the priests and the 
Levites, have not renounced the disgusting practices of the people of the country — the Canaanites, the Hittites, 
the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Moabites, the Egyptians and the Amorites- 

Ezr 9:2 since they and their sons have married some of their women, as a result of which the holy race has 
been contaminated by the people of the country. The officials and leaders have been the worst offenders in this 
act of infidelity”. 

Ezr 9:3 On hearing this, I tore my clothes and my cloak; I pulled hair from my head and beard and sat down in 
horror. 

Ezr 9:4 All who trembled at the words of the God of Israel gathered round me, when faced with the infidelity of 
the exiles, while I went on sitting there in horror until the evening sacrifice. 

Ezr 9:5 At the evening sacrifice I came out of my stupor and, falling on my knees in my torn clothes and cloak, 
stretched out my hands to Yahweh my God, 

Ezr 9:6 and said: “My God, I am ashamed, I blush to lift my face to you, my God. For our iniquities have 
increased, until they are higher than our heads, and our guilt has risen as high as heaven. 

Ezr 9:7 From the days of our ancestors until now we have been deeply guilty and, because of our iniquities, we, 
our kings and our priests, have been handed over to the kings of other countries, to the sword, to captivity, to 
pillage, to shame, as is the case today. 

Ezr 9:8 And now, for a brief moment, the favour of Yahweh our God has allowed a remnant of us to escape and 
given us a stable home in his holy place, so that our God can raise our spirits and revive us a little in our slavery. 
Ezr 9:9 For we are slaves; but God has not forgotten us in our slavery; he has extended his faithful love to us 
even under the kings of Persia and revived us to rebuild the Temple of our God, restore its ruins and provide us 
with a refuge in Judah and in Jerusalem. 

Ezr 9:10 But now, our God, what can we say after this? For we have abandoned your commandments, 

Ezr 9:1 1 which you gave through your servants the prophets in these terms, ‘The country which you are about 
to possess is a polluted country, polluted by the people of the country and their disgusting practices, which have 
filled it with their filth from end to end. 

Ezr 9:12 Hence you are not to give your daughters in marriage to their sons, or let their daughters marry your 
sons, or ever concern yourselves about peace or good relations with them, if you want to grow stronger, to live 
off the fat of the land and bequeath it to your sons for ever’. 

Ezr 9:13 “After all that has befallen us because of our evil deeds and our deep guilt — though you, our God, have 
punished us less than our iniquities deserved and have allowed us to escape like this- 
Ezr 9:14 are we to break your commandments again and intermarry with people with these disgusting 
practices? Would you not be enraged with us to the point of destroying us, leaving neither remnant nor survivor? 
Ezr 9:15 Yahweh, God of Israel, you are upright. We survive only as the remnant we are today. We come before 
you in our guilt; because of it we cannot stand in your presence”. 

Ezr 10:1 While Ezra, weeping and prostrating himself in front of the Temple of God, was praying and making 
confession, a very large crowd of men, women and children of Israel gathered round him, the people weeping 
bitterly. 

Ezr 1 0:2 Then Shechaniah son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, spoke up and said to Ezra, “We have been 
unfaithful to our God by marrying foreign women from the people of the country. But, in spite of this, there is still 
some hope for Israel. 



Ezr 10:3 We will make a covenant with our God to send away all the foreign wives and their children in 
obedience to the advice of my lord and of those who tremble at the commandment of our God. Let us act in 
accordance with the Law. 

Ezr 10:4 Go ahead, do your duty; we support you. Be brave, take action!”. 

Ezr 10:5 Then Ezra stood up and put the leading priests and Levites and all Israel on oath to do what had been 
said. They took the oath. 

Ezr 10:6 Ezra then left his place in front of the Temple of God and went to the room of Jehohanan son of 
Eliashib, where he spent the night without eating food or drinking water, because he was still mourning over the 
exiles’ infidelity. 

Ezr 10:7 A proclamation was issued throughout Judah and Jerusalem that all the exiles were to assemble in 
Jerusalem, 

Ezr 1 0:8 and that anyone who failed within three days to answer the summons of the officials and elders was to 
forfeit all his possessions and himself be excluded from the community of the exiles. 

Ezr 10:9 As a result, all the men of Judah and Benjamin assembled in Jerusalem within the three days; it was 
the twentieth day of the ninth month. All the people sat down in the square in front of the Temple of God, 
trembling because of the matter in hand and because of the heavy rain. 

Ezr 10:10 The priest Ezra then stood up and said to them, “You have been unfaithful and have married foreign 
wives, thus adding to Israel’s guilt. 

Ezr 10:1 1 So now give thanks to Yahweh, God of your ancestors, and do his will by holding aloof from the 
people of the country and from foreign wives”. 

Ezr 10:12 In ringing tones, the whole assembly answered, “Yes, our duty is to do as you say. 

Ezr 10:13 But there are many people here and it is the rainy season; we cannot stay out in the open; besides, 
this is not something that can be dealt with in one or two days, since many of us have been unfaithful over this. 
Ezr 10:14 Let our officials deputise for the whole community, and all the people in our towns who have married 
foreign wives can come at stated times, accompanied by elders and judges from each town, until our God’s 
fierce anger over this is turned away from us”. 

Ezr 10:15 Only Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah, supported by Meshullam and Shabbethai 
the Levite, were opposed to this. 

Ezr 10:16 The exiles did as had been proposed. And the priest Ezra selected the family heads of the various 
families, all of them by name, who began their sittings on the first day of the tenth month to look into the matter. 
Ezr 10:17 And by the first day of the first month they had dealt with all the men who had married foreign women. 
Ezr 10:18 Among the priests who were found to have married foreign wives were: of the sons of Jeshua son of 
Jozadak and his brothers: Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib and Gedaliah, 

Ezr 10:19 who agreed to send their wives away; their guilt offering was a ram from the flock for their guilt; 

Ezr 10:20 of the sons of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah; 

Ezr 1 0:21 of the sons of Harim: Maaseiah, Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel and Uzziah; 

Ezr 1 0:22 of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad and Elasah; 

Ezr 10:23 of the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah — that is, Kelita-Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer; 

Ezr 10:24 of the singers: Eliashib and Zaccur; of the gatekeepers: Shallum, Telem and Uri; 

Ezr 10:25 and of the Israelites: of the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malchijah, Mijamin, Eleazar, Malchijah 
and Benaiah; 

Ezr 1 0:26 of the sons of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth and Elijah; 

Ezr 10:27 of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Jeremoth, Zabad and Aziza; 

Ezr 1 0:28 of the sons of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Atlai; 

Ezr 1 0:29 of the sons of Bigvai: Meshullam, Malluch, Jedaiah, Jashub, Sheal, Jeremoth; 

Ezr 1 0:30 of the sons of Pahath-Moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui and 
Manasseh; 

Ezr 1 0:31 of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, 

Ezr 10:32 Benjamin, Malluch, Shemariah; 

Ezr 1 0:33 of the sons of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei; 

Ezr 1 0:34 of the sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, Uel, 

Ezr 10:35 Benaiah, Bediah, Jeluhi, 

Ezr 10:36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 

Ezr 10:37 Mattaniah, Mattenai and Jaasau; 

Ezr 1 0:38 of the sons of Binnui: Shimei, 

Ezr 10:39 Shelemiah, Nathan and Adaiah; 

Ezr 10:40 of the sons of Zaccai: Shashai, Sharai, 

Ezr 10:41 Azarel, Shelemiah, Shemariah, 

Ezr 10:42 Shallum, Amariah, Joseph; 



Ezr 10:43 of the sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, Benaiah. 

Ezr 10:44 All these had married foreign wives but sent them away with their children. 

Neh 1:1 The words of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah. It happened in the month of Chislev, in the twentieth year, 
while I was in the citadel of Susa, 

Neh 1 :2 that Hanani, one of my brothers, arrived with some men from Judah. I asked them about the Jews — 
those who had escaped and those who survived from the captivity — and about Jerusalem. 

Neh 1:3 They replied, The survivors remaining there in the province since the captivity are in a very bad and 
demoralised condition: the walls of Jerusalem are in ruins and its gates have been burnt down”. 

Neh 1 :4 On hearing this I sat down and wept; for some days I mourned, fasting and praying before the God of 
heaven. 

Neh 1:5 I said, “Yahweh, God of heaven — the great and awe-inspiring God who keeps a covenant of faithful 
love with those who love him and obey his commandments- 

Neh 1 :6 let your ear be attentive and your eyes open, to listen to your servant’s prayer, which I now offer to you 
day and night on behalf of your servants the Israelites. I admit the sins of the Israelites, which we have 
committed against you. Both I and my father’s House have sinned; 

Neh 1:7 we have acted very wickedly towards you by not keeping the commandments, laws and rulings which 
you enjoined on your servant Moses. 

Neh 1 :8 Remember, I beg you, the promise which you solemnly made to your servant Moses, ‘If you are 
unfaithful, I shall scatter you among the peoples; 

Neh 1 :9 but if you come back to me and keep my commandments and practise them, even though those who 
have been banished are at the very sky’s end, I shall gather them from there and bring them back to the place 
which I have chosen as a dwelling-place for my name’. 

Neh 1:10 Since they are your servants, your people, whom you have redeemed with your mighty power and 
strong hand, 

Neh 1:11 O Lord, let your ear now be attentive to your servant’s prayer and to the prayer of your servants who 
want to revere your name. I beg you let your servant be successful today and win this man’s compassion”. At the 
time I was cupbearer to the king. 

Neh 2:1 In the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes, since I was in charge of the wine, I took 
the wine and offered it to the king. Now, he had never seen me looking depressed before. 

Neh 2:2 So the king said to me, “Why are you looking depressed? You are not sick! This must be a sadness of 
the heart”. Thoroughly alarmed by this, 

Neh 2:3 I said to the king, “May the king live for ever! How can I not look depressed when the city where the 
tombs of my ancestors are lies in ruins and its gates have been burnt down?”. 

Neh 2:4 The king then said to me, “What would you like me to do?”. Praying to the God of heaven, 

Neh 2:5 I said to the king, “If the king approves and your servant enjoys your favour, send me to Judah, to the 
city of the tombs of my ancestors, so that I can rebuild it”. 

Neh 2:6 The king — with the queen sitting beside him-said, “How long will your journey take, and when will you 
come back?”. Once I had given him a definite time, the king approved my mission. 

Neh 2:7 I then said to the king, “If the king approves, may I be given orders for the governors of Transeuphrates 
to let me pass through on my way to Judah? 

Neh 2:8 Also an order for Asaph, keeper of the king’s forest, to supply me with timber for the beams of the gates 
of the citadel of the Temple, for the city walls and for the house which I am to occupy?”. These the king granted 
me because the kindly hand of my God was over me. 

Neh 2:9 When I reached the governors of Transeuphrates, I gave them the king’s orders. The king had sent an 
escort of army officers and cavalry along with me. 

Neh 2:10 When Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the official of Ammon heard about this, they were 
exceedingly displeased that someöne had come to promote the welfare of the Israelites. 

Neh 2:1 1 And so I reached Jerusalem. After I had been there three days, 

Neh 2:12 I got up during the night with a few other men — 1 had not told anyone what my God had inspired me to 
do for Jerusalem — taking no animal with me other than my own mount. 

Neh 2:13 Under cover of dark I went out through the Valley Gate towards the Dragon’s Fountain as far as the 
Dung Gate, and examined the wall of Jerusalem where it was broken down and its gates burnt out. 

Neh 2:14 I then crossed to the Fountain Gate and the King’s Pool, but it was impassable to my mount. 

Neh 2:15 Sol went up the Valley in the dark, examining the wall; I then went in again through the Valley Gate, 
coming back 

Neh 2:16 without the officials knowing where I had gone or what I had been doing. So far I had said nothing to 
the Jews: neither to the priests, the nobles, the officials nor any other persons involved in the undertaking. 

Neh 2:17 I then said to them, “You see what a sorry state we are in: Jerusalem is in ruins and its gates have 
been burnt down. Come on, we must rebuild the walls of Jerusalem and put an end to our humiliating position!”. 



Neh 2:18 And I told them how the kindly hand of my God had been over me, and the words which the king had 
said to me. At this they said, “Let us start building at once!”. and they set their hands to the good work. 

Neh 2:19 When Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the official of Ammon, and Geshem the Arab heard about this, 
they laughed at us and jeered. They said, “What is this you are doing? Are you going to revolt against the king?”. 
Neh 2:20 But I gave them this answer, “The God of heaven will grant us success and we, his servants, mean to 
start building; as for you, you have neither share nor right nor memorial in Jerusalem”. 

Neh 3:1 Eliashib the high priest with his brother priests then set to work and rebuilt the Sheep Gate; they made 
the framework, hung its doors, fixed its bolts and bars and proceeded as far as the Tower of the Hundred and 
the Tower of Hananel. 

Neh 3:2 The men of Jericho built next to him; Zaccur son of Imri built next to them. 

Neh 3:3 The sons of Ha-Senaah rebuilt the Fish Gate; they made the framework, hung its doors and fixed its 
bolts and bars. 

Neh 3:4 Meremoth son of Uriah, son of Hakkoz, carried out repairs next to them; Meshullam son of Berechiah, 
son of Meshezabel, carried out repairs next to him; and Zadok son of Baana carried out repairs next to him. 

Neh 3:5 The men of Tekoa carried out repairs next to him, though their nobles would not demean themselves to 
help their masters. 

Neh 3:6 Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah repaired the gate of the New Quarter; they 
made the framework, hung its doors and fixed its bolts and bars. 

Neh 3:7 Next to them repairs were carried out by Melatiah of Gibeon, Jadon of Meronoth, and the men of 
Gibeon and Mizpah, for the sake of the governor of Transeuphrates. 

Neh 3:8 Next to them repairs were carried out by Uzziel son of Harhaiah, a member of the metal-workers’ guild, 
and next to him repairs were carried out by Hananiah of the perfumers’ guild. These renovated the wall of 
Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall. 

Neh 3:9 Next to them repairs were carried out by Rephaiah son of Hur, who was head of one half of the district 
of Jerusalem. 

Neh 3:10 Next to them Jedaiah son of Harumaph carried out repairs opposite his own house; next to him repairs 
were carried out by Hattush son of Hashabneiah. 

Neh 3:1 1 Malchijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-Moab repaired another section as far as the 
Furnace Tower. 

Neh 3:12 Next to them repairs were carried out by Shallum son of Hallohesh, head of the other half of the 
district of Jerusalem, by him and his sons. 

Neh 3:13 Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired the Valley Gate: they rebuilt it, hung its doors and fixed 
its bolts and bars; they also repaired a thousand cubits of wall up to the Dung Gate. 

Neh 3:14 Malchijah son of Rechab, head of the district of Beth-ha-Cherem, repaired the Dung Gate; he rebuilt it, 
hung its doors and fixed its bolts and bars. 

Neh 3:15 Shallum son of Col-Hozeh, head of the district of Mizpah, repaired the Fountain Gate; he rebuilt it, 
roofed it, hung its doors and fixed its bolts and bars. He also rebuilt the wall of the Pool of Siloah, adjoining the 
king’s garden, as far as the steps going down from the City of David. 

Neh 3:16 After him, Nehemiah son of Azbuk, head of half the district of Beth-Zur, carried out repairs from a point 
opposite the Davidic Tombs to the artificial pool and the House of the Champions. 

Neh 3:17 After him, repairs were carried out by the Levites: Rehum son of Bani; and next to him Hashabiah, 
head of one half of the district of Keilah, carried out repairs for his own district. 

Neh 3:18 After him, repairs were carried out by their brothers: Binnui son of Henadad, head of the other half of 
the district of Keilah. 

Neh 3:19 Next to him, Ezer son of Jeshua, headman of Mizpah, repaired another section in front of the ascent 
to the armoury at the Angle. 

Neh 3:20 After him, Baruch son of Zabbai repaired another section from the Angle to the door of the house of 
Eliashib the high priest. 

Neh 3:21 After him, Meremoth son of Uriah, son of Hakkoz, repaired another section from the door of Eliashib’s 
house as far as the end of Eliashib’s house. 

Neh 3:22 And after him repairs were carried out by the priests who lived in the district. 

Neh 3:23 After them repairs were carried out by Benjamin and Hasshub, opposite their own house. After them 
repairs were carried out by Azariah son of Maaseiah, son of Ananiah, beside his own house. 

Neh 3:24 After him, Binnui son of Henadad repaired another section from Azariah’s house as far as the Angle at 
the corner. 

Neh 3:25 After him, Palal son of Uzai carried out repairs in front of the Angle and the tower projecting from the 
king’s Upper Palace by the Court of the Guard; and after him, Pedaiah son of Parosh carried out the repairs 
Neh 3:26 to a point by the Water Gate to the east and the projecting tower. 

Neh 3:27 After him, the men of Tekoa repaired another section from in front of the great projecting tower as far 



as the wall of Ophel. 

Neh 3:28 From the Horse Gate onwards repairs were carried out by the priests, each in front of his own house. 
Neh 3:29 After them repairs were carried out by Zadok son of Immer in front of his house, and after him repairs 
were carried out by Shemaiah son of Shechaniah, keeper of the East Gate. 

Neh 3:30 After him Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun sixth son of Zalaph repaired another section, after 
whom repairs were carried out by Meshullam son of Berechiah in front of his room. 

Neh 3:31 After him Malchijah, of the metal-workers’ guild, repaired as far as the Hall of the temple slaves and 
merchants, in front of the Muster Gate, as far as the upper room at the corner. 

Neh 3:32 And between the upper room at the corner and the Sheep Gate repairs were carried out by the 
goldsmiths and the merchants. 

Neh 3:33 When Sanballat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, he became furiously angry. 

Neh 3:34 He ridiculed the Jews and in front of his kinsmen and the aristocracy of Samaria he exclaimed, “What 
are these pathetic Jews doing … ? Are they going to give up? Or offer sacrifices? Or complete the work in a 
day? Can they put new life into stones taken from rubbish heaps and even charred?”. 

Neh 3:35 And beside him Tobiah of Ammon remarked, “If a jackal were to jump on what they are building, it 

would knock their stone wall down!”. 

Neh 3:36 Listen, our God, for we are despised! Make their sneers fall back on their own heads! Send them as 
booty to a land of captivity! 

Neh 3:37 Do not pardon their wickedness, may their sin never be erased before you, for they have insulted the 
builders to their face! 

Neh 3:38 Meanwhile we were rebuilding the wall, which was soon joined up all the way round to mid-height; the 
people put their hearts into the work. 

Neh 4:1 When Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabs, the Ammonites and the Ashdodites heard that repairs to the walls 
of Jerusalem were going forward — that the gaps were beginning to fill up — they became very angry, 

Neh 4:2 and they all plotted to come and attack Jerusalem and upset my plans. 

Neh 4:3 We, however, prayed to our God and organised a guard day and night to protect the city from them. 

Neh 4:4 But in Judah the saying went, “The strength of the carrier falters, the rubbish heap is so vast that by 
ourselves we cannot rebuild the wall!”. 

Neh 4:5 And our opponents said, “They will never know or see a thing, until we are in there among them, and 
then we shall massacre them and put a stop to the work”. 

Neh 4:6 Now when the Jews who lived near them had warned us ten times over, “They are coming up against 
us from every place they live in”, 

Neh 4:7 men took up position in the space behind the wall at those points where it was lowest, and I organised 
the people by families with their swords, spears and bows. 

Neh 4:8 Aware of their anxiety, I then addressed the nobles, the officials and the rest of the people, “Do not be 
afraid of them. Remember the great and awe-inspiring Lord and fight for your kinsmen, your sons, your 
daughters, your wives and your homes”. 

Neh 4:9 Once our enemies heard that we were forewarned and that God had thwarted their plan, they withdrew 
and we all went back to the wall, each one to his work. 

Neh 4:10 From then on, half my own retainers went on working, while the other half stood by, armed with 
spears, shields, bows and armour to protect the whole House of Judah as they rebuilt the wall. 

Neh 4:1 1 The carriers were armed, working with one hand and holding a spear in the other. 

Neh 4:12 Each builder had his sword strapped to his side as he built. Beside me stood a trumpeter. 

Neh 4:13 I then said to the nobles, the officials and the rest of the people, “The work is great and widely spread 
out, and we are deployed along the wall some way from one another. 

Neh 4:14 Rally to us wherever you hear the trumpet sounding; our God will fight for us”. 

Neh 4:15 And so we went on with the work from break of day until the stars came out. 

Neh 4:16 At the same time I also told the people, “Let every man, with his attendant, spend the night inside 
Jerusalem; we shall spend the night on guard and the day at work”. 

Neh 4:17 Neither I, nor my brothers, nor my attendants, nor my bodyguards, ever took off our clothes; each one 
kept his spear in his right hand. 

Neh 5:1 There was a great outcry from the people, and from their wives, against their brother Jews. 

Neh 5:2 Some said, “We are having to pledge our sons and daughters to get enough grain to eat and keep us 
alive”. 

Neh 5:3 Others said, “We are having to mortgage our fields, our vineyards and our houses to get grain because 
of the shortage”. 

Neh 5:4 Still others said, “We have had to borrow money on our fields and our vineyards to pay the royal tax; 
Neh 5:5 and though we belong to the same race as our brothers, and our children are as good as theirs, we 
shall have to sell our sons and our daughters into slavery; some of our daughters have been sold into slavery 



already. We can do nothing about it, since our fields and our vineyards now belong to others”. 

Neh 5:6 When I heard their complaints and these words I was very angry. 

Neh 5:7 Having turned the matter over in my mind, I reprimanded the nobles and the officials as follows, “Each 
of you is imposing a burden on his brother”. Summoning a great assembly to deal with them, 

Neh 5:8 I said to them, “To the best of our power, we have redeemed our brother Jews who were forced to sell 
themselves to foreigners, and now you in turn are selling your brothers, for them to be bought back by us!”. They 
were silent and could find nothing to say. 

Neh 5:9 “What you are doing”, I went on, “is wrong. Do you not want to walk in the fear of our God and escape 
the sneers of the nations, our enemies? 

Neh 5:10 I too, with my brothers and retainers, have lent them money and grain. Let us cancel these pledges. 
Neh 5:1 1 This very day return them their fields, their vineyards, their olive groves and their houses, and cancel 
the claim on the money, grain, new wine and olive oil, which you have lent them”. 

Neh 5:12 “We shall make restitution”, they replied, “we shall claim nothing more from them; we shall do as you 
say”. Summoning the priests, I then made them swear to do as they had promised. 

Neh 5:13 Then, shaking out the fold of my garment, I said, “May God thus shake out of house and possessions 
anyone who does not make good this promise; may he be shaken out thus and left empty!”. And the whole 
assembly answered, “Amen” and praised Yahweh. And the people kept this promise. 

Neh 5:14 What is more, from the time when the king appointed me to be their governor in Judah, from the 
twentieth to the thirty-second year of King Artaxerxes, for twelve years, neither I nor my brothers ever levied the 
governor’s subsistence allowance, 

Neh 5:15 whereäs the former governors, my predecessors, had been a burden on the people, from whom they 
took forty silver shekels a day for food and wine, while their attendants oppressed the people too. But I, fearing 
God, never did this. 

Neh 5:16 Also, not acquiring any land, I concentrated on the work of this wall and all my attendants joined in the 
work together, too. 

Neh 5:17 Furthermore, magistrates and officials to the number of a hundred and fifty ate at my table, not to 
mention those who came to us from the surrounding nations. 

Neh 5:18 Every day, one ox, six fine sheep, as well as poultry, were prepared for me; every ten days, skins of 
wine were brought in bulk. But even so, I never claimed the governor’s subsistence allowance, since the people 
already had burden enough to bear. 

Neh 5:19 To my credit, my God, remember all I have done for this people. 

Neh 6:1 When Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arab and our other enemies heard that I had rebuilt the wall and 
that not a single gap was left — though at that time I had not fixed the doors to the gates- 

Neh 6:2 Sanballat and Geshem sent me this message, “Come and meet us at Ha-Chephirim in the Vale of Ono”. 
But they had evil designs on me. 

Neh 6:3 So I sent messengers to them to say, “I am engaged in a great undertaking, so I cannot come down. 
Why should the work stop while I leave it and come down to you?”. 

Neh 6:4 Four times they sent me the same invitation and I made them the same reply. 

Neh 6:5 The fifth time, with the same purpose in mind, Sanballat sent me his servant bearing an open letter. 

Neh 6:6 It ran, “There is a rumour among the nations — and Gashmu confirms it — that you and the Jews are 
thinking of rebelling, which is why you are rebuilding the wall, and you intend to become their king; 

Neh 6:7 and that you have even briefed prophets to acclaim you in Jerusalem with the cry, ‘There is a king in 
Judah!’. Now, these rumours are going to reach the king; so you had better come and discuss them with us”. 

Neh 6:8 To this I sent him the following reply, “As regards what you say, nothing of the sort has occurred; it is a 
figment of your own imagination”. 

Neh 6:9 For they were all trying to terrorise us, thinking, “They will become demoralised over the work and it will 
not get finished”. But my morale rose even higher. 

Neh 6:10 Then, when I went to visit Shemaiah son of Delaiah, son of Mehetabel, since he was prevented from 
coming to me, he said: We must gather at the Temple of God, inside the sanctuary itself; we must shut the 
sanctuary doors, for they are coming to kill you, they are coming to kill you tonight! 

Neh 6:1 1 But I retorted, “Should a man like me run away? Would a man like me go into the Temple to save his 
life? I shall not go in!”. 

Neh 6:12 I realised that God had not sent him to say this, but that he had produced this prophecy for me 
because Tobiah was paying him 

Neh 6:13 to terrorise me into doing as he said and committing a sin, so that they would have grounds for 
blackening my reputation and blaming me. 

Neh 6:14 Remember Tobiah, my God, for what he did; and Noadiah the prophetess, and the other prophets 
who tried to terrorise me. 

Neh 6:15 The wall was finished within fifty-two days, on the twenty-fifth of Elul. 



Neh 6:16 When all our enemies heard about it and all the surrounding nations saw it, they thought it a wonderful 
thing, because they realised that this work had been accomplished by the power of our God. 

Neh 6:17 During this same period, the nobles of Judah kept sending letter after letter to Tobiah, and letters from 
Tobiah kept arriving for them; 

Neh 6:18 for he had many sworn to his interest in Judah, since he was son-in-law to Shecaniah son of Arah, 
and his son Jehohanan had married the daughter of Meshullam son of Berechiah. 

Neh 6:19 They even cried up his good deeds in my presence, and they reported what I said back to him. And 
Tobiah kept sending letters to terrorise me. 

Neh 7:1 Now, when the wall had been rebuilt and I had hung the doors, the gatekeepers (the singers and the 
Levites) were then appointed. 

Neh 7:2 I entrusted the administration of Jerusalem to my brother Hanani, and to Hananiah the commander of 
the citadel, for he was a more trustworthy, God-fearing man than many others. 

Neh 7:3 I said to them, “The gates of Jerusalem must not be opened until the sun gets hot; and the doors must 
be shut and barred before it begins to go down. Detail guards from the residents of Jerusalem, each to his post, 
in front of his own house”. 

Neh 7:4 The city was large and spacious but the population was small, and the houses had not been rebuilt. 

Neh 7:5 My God then inspired me to assemble the nobles, the officials and the people for the purpose of taking 
a census by families. I discovered the genealogical register of those who had returned in the first group, and 
there I found entered: 

Neh 7:6 These are the people of the province who returned from the captivity of the Exile, those whom 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had deported, and who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own 
town. 

Neh 7:7 They were the ones who arrived with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, 
Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel: 

Neh 7:8 sons of Parosh, two thousand one hundred and seventy-two; 

Neh 7:9 sons of Shephatiah, three hundred and seventy-two; 

Neh 7:10 sons of Arah, six hundred and fifty-two; 

Neh 7:1 1 sons of Pahath-Moab, that is to say sons of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and 
eighteen; 

Neh 7:12 sons of Elam, one thousand two hundred and fifty-four; 

Neh 7:13 sons of Zattu, eight hundred and forty-five; 

Neh 7:14 sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty; 

Neh 7:15 sons of Binnui, six hundred and forty-eight; 

Neh 7:16 sons of Bebai, six hundred and twenty-eight; 

Neh 7:17 sons of Azgad, two thousand three hundred and twenty-two; 

Neh 7:18 sons of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty-seven; 

Neh 7:19 sons of Bigvai, two thousand and sixty-seven; 

Neh 7:20 sons of Adin, six hundred and fifty-five; 

Neh 7:21 sons of Ater, that is to say of Hezekiah, ninety-eight; 

Neh 7:22 sons of Hashum, three hundred and twenty-eight; 

Neh 7:23 sons of Bezai, three hundred and twenty-four; 

Neh 7:24 sons of Hariph, one hundred and twelve; 

Neh 7:25 sons of Gibeon, ninety-five; 

Neh 7:26 men of Bethlehem and Netophah, one hundred and eighty-eight; 

Neh 7:27 men of Anathoth, one hundred and twenty-eight; 

Neh 7:28 men of Beth-Azmaveth, forty-two; 

Neh 7:29 men of Kiriath-Jearim, Chephirah and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three; 

Neh 7:30 men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred and twenty-one; 

Neh 7:31 men of Michmas, one hundred and twenty-two; 

Neh 7:32 men of Bethel and Ai, one hundred and twenty-three; 

Neh 7:33 men of the other Nebo, fifty-two; 

Neh 7:34 sons of the other Elam, one thousand two hundred and fifty-four; 

Neh 7:35 sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty; 

Neh 7:36 sons of Jericho, three hundred and forty-five; 

Neh 7:37 sons of Lod, Hadid and Ono, seven hundred and twenty-one; 

Neh 7:38 sons of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty. 

Neh 7:39 The priests: sons of Jedaiah, of the House of Jeshua, nine hundred and seventy-three; 

Neh 7:40 sons of Immer, one thousand and fifty-two; 

Neh 7:41 sons of Pashhur, one thousand two hundred and forty-seven; 



Neh 7:42 sons of Harim, one thousand and seventeen. 

Neh 7:43 The Levites: sons of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodiah, seventy-four. 

Neh 7:44 The singers: sons of Asaph, one hundred and forty-eight. 

Neh 7:45 The gatekeepers: sons of Shallum, sons of Ater, sons of Talmon, sons of Akkub, sons of Hatita, sons 
of Shobai, one hundred and thirty-eight. 

Neh 7:46 The temple slaves: sons of Ziha, sons of Hasupha, sons of Tabbaoth, 

Neh 7:47 sons of Keros, sons of Sia, sons of Padon, 

Neh 7:48 sons of Lebana, sons of Hagaba, sons of Shalmai, 

Neh 7:49 sons of Hanan, sons of Giddel, sons of Gahar, 

Neh 7:50 sons of Reaiah, sons of Rezin, sons of Nekoda, 

Neh 7:51 sons of Gazzam, sons of Uzza, sons of Paseah, 

Neh 7:52 sons of Besai, sons of the Meunites, sons of the Nephusites, 

Neh 7:53 sons of Bakbuk, sons of Hakupha, sons of Harhur, 

Neh 7:54 sons of Bazlith, sons of Mehida, sons of Harsha, 

Neh 7:55 sons of Barkos, sons of Sisera, sons of Temah, 

Neh 7:56 sons of Nezaiah, sons of Hatipha. 

Neh 7:57 The sons of Solomon’s slaves: sons of Sotai, sons of Sophereth, sons of Perida, 

Neh 7:58 sons of Jaala, sons of Darkon, sons of Giddel, 

Neh 7:59 sons of Shephatiah, sons of Hattil, sons of Pochereth-ha-Zebaim, sons of Amon. 

Neh 7:60 The total of the temple slaves and the sons of Solomon’s slaves: three hundred and ninety-two. 

Neh 7:61 The following, who came from Tel-Melah, Tel-Harsha, Cherub, Addon and Immer, could not prove that 
their families and ancestry were of Israelite origin: 

Neh 7:62 the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda: six hundred and forty-two. 

Neh 7:63 And among the priests: the sons of Hobaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai — who had 
married one of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, whose name he adopted. 

Neh 7:64 These had looked for their entries in the official genealogies but were not to be found there, and were 
hence disqualified from the priesthood. 

Neh 7:65 Consequently, His Excellency forbade them to eat any of the consecrated food until a priest appeared 
who could consult urim and thummim. 

Neh 7:66 The whole assembly numbered forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty people, 

Neh 7:67 not counting their slaves and maidservants to the number of seven thousand three hundred and thirty- 
seven. They also had two hundred and forty-five male and female singers. 

Neh 7:68 They had four hundred and thirty-five camels and six thousand seven hundred and twenty donkeys. 
Neh 7:69 A certain number of heads of families contributed to the work. His Excellency contributed one 
thousand gold drachmas, fifty bowls, and thirty priestly robes to the fund. 

Neh 7:70 And heads of families gave twenty thousand gold drachmas and two thousand two hundred silver 
minas to the work fund. 

Neh 7:71 The gifts made by the rest of the people amounted to twenty thousand gold drachmas, two thousand 
silver minas, and sixty-seven priestly robes. 

Neh 7:72 The priests, the Levites and some of the people lived in Jerusalem and thereabouts; the singers, the 
gatekeepers, and the temple slaves in their appropriate towns; and all the other Israelites, in their own towns. 
Now when the seventh month came round — the Israelites being in their towns- 

Neh 8:1 all the people gathered as one man in the square in front of the Water Gate, and asked the scribe Ezra 
to bring the Book of the Law of Moses which Yahweh had prescribed for Israel. 

Neh 8:2 Accordingly, on the first day of the seventh month, the priest Ezra brought the Law before the 
assembly, consisting of men, women and all those old enough to understand. 

Neh 8:3 In the square in front of the Water Gate, in the presence of the men and women, and of those old 
enough to understand, he read from the book from dawn till noon; all the people listened attentively to the Book 
of the Law. 

Neh 8:4 The scribe Ezra stood on a wooden dais erected for the purpose; beside him stood, on his right, 
Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah and Maaseiah; on his left, Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum, 
Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam. 

Neh 8:5 In full view of all the people — since he stood higher than them all — Ezra opened the book; and when 
he opened it, all the people stood up. 

Neh 8:6 Then Ezra blessed Yahweh, the great God, and all the people raised their hands and answered, “Amen! 
Amen!”; then they bowed down and, face to the ground, prostrated themselves before Yahweh. 

Neh 8:7 And Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabab, 
Hanan, Pelaiah, who were Levites, explained the Law to the people, while the people all kept their places. 

Neh 8:8 Ezra read from the book of the Law of God, translating and giving the sense; so the reading was 



understood, 

Neh 8:9 Then His Excellency Nehemiah and the priest-scribe Ezra and the Levites who were instructing the 
people said to all the people, “Today is sacred to Yahweh your God. Do not be mournful, do not weep”. For the 
people were all in tears as they listened to the words of the Law. 

Neh 8:10 He then said, “You may go; eat what is rich, drink what is sweet and send a helping to the man who 
has nothing prepared. For today is sacred to our Lord. Do not be sad: the joy of Yahweh is your stronghold”. 

Neh 8:1 1 And the Levites calmed all the people down, saying, “Keep quiet; this is a sacred day. Do not be sad”. 
Neh 8:12 Then all the people went off to eat and drink and give helpings away and enjoy themselves to the full, 
since they had understood the meaning of what had been proclaimed to them. 

Neh 8:13 On the second day, the heads of families of the whole people, and the priests and Levites, gathered 
round the scribe Ezra to study the words of the Law. 

Neh 8:14 And written in the Law that Yahweh had prescribed through Moses they found that the Israelites were 
to live in shelters during the feast of the seventh month. 

Neh 8:15 So they issued a proclamation and had it circulated in all their towns and in Jerusalem: “Go into the 
hills and bring branches of olive, pine, myrtle, palm and other leafy trees to make shelters, as it says in the book”. 
Neh 8:16 The people went out; they brought branches and made shelters for themselves, each man on his roof, 
in their courtyards, in the precincts of the Temple of God, in the square of the Water Gate and in the square of 
the Ephraim Gate. 

Neh 8:17 The whole assembly, all who had returned from the captivity, put up shelters and lived in them; this 
the Israelites had not done from the days of Joshua son of Nun till that day, and there was very great 
merrymaking. 

Neh 8:18 Each day, from the first day to the last one, Ezra read from the Book of the Law of God. They 
celebrated the feast for seven days; on the eighth day, as prescribed, they held a solemn assembly. 

Neh 9:1 On the twenty-fourth day of this month the Israelites, in sackcloth and with dust on their heads, 
assembled for a fast. 

Neh 9:2 Then those of Israelite stock who had severed relations with all foreigners stood up and confessed their 
sins and the iniquities of their ancestors. 

Neh 9:3 Standing, each man in his place, they read from the Book of the Law of Yahweh their God for one 
quarter of the day; for another quarter they confessed their sins and worshipped Yahweh their God. 

Neh 9:4 On the Levites’ platform stood Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani and 
Chenani, calling to Yahweh their God in ringing tones. 

Neh 9:5 The Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah and Pethahiah said, 
“Stand up and bless Yahweh your God! “Blessed are you, Yahweh our God from everlasting to everlasting, and 
blessed be your glorious name, surpassing all blessing and praise! 

Neh 9:6 “You, Yahweh, are the one, only Yahweh, you have created the heavens, the heaven of heavens and 
all their array, the earth and all it bears, the seas and all they hold. To all of them you give life, and the array of 
heaven worships you. 

Neh 9:7 “You are Yahweh God, who chose Abram, brought him out of Ur in Chaldaea and changed his name to 
Abraham. 

Neh 9:8 Finding his heart was faithful to you, you made a covenant with him, to give the country of the 
Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites and the Girgashites to him and his 
descendants. And you have made good your promises, for you are upright. 

Neh 9:9 “You saw the distress of our ancestors in Egypt, you heard their cry by the Sea of Reeds. 

Neh 9:10 You displayed signs and wonders against Pharaoh, against all his servants and all the people of his 
land; for you knew how arrogantly they treated them. You won a reputation which you keep to this day. 

Neh 9:1 1 You opened up the sea in front of them: they walked on dry ground right through the sea. Into the 
depths you hurled their pursuers like a stone into the raging waters. 

Neh 9:12 With a pillar of cloud you led them by day, with a pillar of fire by night: to light the way ahead of them 
by which they were to go. 

Neh 9:13 You came down on Mount Sinai and spoke with them from heaven; you gave them right rules, reliable 
laws, good statutes and commandments; 

Neh 9:14 you revealed your holy Sabbath to them; you laid down commandments, statutes and law for them 
through your servant Moses. 

Neh 9:15 For their hunger you gave them bread from heaven, for their thirst you brought them water out of a 
rock, and you told them to go in and take possession of the country which you had sworn to give them. 

Neh 9:16 “But they and our ancestors acted arrogantly, grew obstinate and flouted your commands. 

Neh 9:17 They refused to obey, forgetful of the wonders which you had worked for them; they grew obstinate 
and made up their minds to return to their slavery in Egypt. But because you are a forgiving God, gracious and 
compassionate, patient and rich in faithful love, you did not abandon them! 



Neh 9:18 “Even when they cast themselves a calf out of molten metal and said, ‘This is your God who brought 
you up from Egypt!’. and committed monstrous impieties, 

Neh 9:19 you, in your great compassion, did not abandon them in the desert: the pillar of cloud did not leave 
them, leading them on their path by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, lighting the way ahead of them by which 
they were to go. 

Neh 9:20 You gave them your good spirit to instruct them, you did not withhold your manna from their mouths, 
you gave them water for their thirst. 

Neh 9:21 For forty years you cared for them in the desert, so that they went short of nothing, their clothes did 
not wear out, nor were their feet swollen. 

Neh 9:22 “You gave them kingdoms and peoples, allotting them these as frontier lands; they occupied the 
country of Sihon king of Heshbon, and the country of Og king of Bashan. 

Neh 9:23 You gave them as many children as there are stars in the sky, and brought them into the country 
which you had promised their ancestors that they would enter and possess. 

Neh 9:24 The children entered and took possession of the country and before them you subdued the country’s 
inhabitants, the Canaanites, whom you put at their mercy, with their kings and the peoples of the country, for 
them to treat as they pleased; 

Neh 9:25 they captured fortified towns and a fertile countryside, they took possession of houses stocked with all 
kinds of goods, of storage-wells ready-hewn, of vineyards, olive groves and fruit trees in profusion; so they ate, 
were full, grew fat and revelled in your great goodness. 

Neh 9:26 “But they grew disobedient, rebelled against you and thrust your law behind their backs; they 
slaughtered your prophets who had reproved them to bring them back to you, and committed monstrous 
impieties. 

Neh 9:27 So you put them at the mercy of their enemies who oppressed them. But when they were being 
oppressed and called to you, you heard them from heaven and because of your great compassion you gave 
them deliverers who rescued them from their oppressors’ clutches. 

Neh 9:28 But once at peace again, again they did what was wrong before you; so you put them at the mercy of 
their enemies who then became their rulers. When they called to you again, you heard them from heaven and, 
because of your compassion, rescued them many times. 

Neh 9:29 You warned them, to bring them back to your law, but they became arrogant, did not obey your 
commandments and sinned against your rules, in whose observance is life; they turned a stubborn shoulder, 
were obstinate, and disobeyed. 

Neh 9:30 You were patient with them for many years and warned them by your spirit through your prophets, but 
they would not listen; so you put them at the mercy of the people of the country. 

Neh 9:31 But, because of your great compassion, you did not destroy them completely nor abandon them, for 
you are a gracious, compassionate God. 

Neh 9:32 Now, our God — the great God, the Mighty and Awe-inspiring One, maintaining the covenant and your 
faithful love- count as no small thing this misery which has befallen us, our kings, our princes, our priests, our 
prophets, and all your people from the times of the Assyrian kings to the present day. 

Neh 9:33 You have been upright in all that has happened to us, for you acted faithfully, while we did wrong. 

Neh 9:34 Our kings, our princes, our priests and our ancestors did not keep your law or pay attention to your 
commandments and obligations which you imposed upon them. 

Neh 9:35 Even in their own kingdom, despite your great goodness which you bestowed on them, despite the 
wide and fertile country which you had lavished on them, they did not serve you or renounce their evil deeds. 
Neh 9:36 See, we are slaves today, slaves in the country which you gave to our ancestors for them to eat the 
good things it produces. 

Neh 9:37 Its abundant produce goes to the kings whom, for our sins, you have set over us, who rule over our 
persons and over our cattle as they please. We are in great distress”. 

Neh 10:1 In view of all this we make a firm agreement, in writing. Our princes, our Levites, our priests and the 
rest of the people have put their names to the document under seal. 

Neh 10:2 On the sealed document were the names of: Nehemiah, son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah; 

Neh 10:3 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 

Neh 10:4 Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah, 

Neh 10:5 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 

Neh 10:6 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, 

Neh 10:7 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 

Neh 10:8 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin, 

Neh 10:9 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these were the priests. 

Neh 10:10 The Levites were: Jeshua son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel, 

Neh 10:1 1 and their kinsmen Shebaniah, Hodaviah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, 



Neh 10:12 Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah, 

Neh 10:13 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 

Neh 10:14 Hodiah, Bani, Chenani. 

Neh 10:15 The leaders of the people were: Parosh, Pahath-Moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani, 

Neh 10:16 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 

Neh 10:17 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 

Neh 10:18 Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur, 

Neh 10:19 Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai, 

Neh 10:20 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai, 

Neh 10:21 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, 

Neh 10:22 Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua, 

Neh 10:23 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 

Neh 10:24 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub, 

Neh 10:25 Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek, 

Neh 10:26 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, 

Neh 10:27 Ahijah, Hanan, Anan, 

Neh 10:28 Malluch, Harim, Baanah. 

Neh 10:29 And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the temple slaves 
and all those who had severed relations with the people of the country to adhere to the law of God, as also their 
wives, their sons, their daughters, that is, all those who had reached the age of discretion, 

Neh 1 0:30 have joined their esteemed brothers in a solemn oath to follow the law of God given through Moses, 
servant of God, and to observe and practise all the commandments of Yahweh our Lord, with his rules and his 
statutes. 

Neh 1 0:31 We will not give our daughters in marriage to the peoples of the country, nor allow their daughters to 
marry our sons. 

Neh 1 0:32 If the people of the country bring goods or foodstuff of any kind to sell on the Sabbath day, we will 
buy nothing from them on Sabbath or holy day. In the seventh year, we will forgo the produce of the soil and the 
exaction of all debts. 

Neh 10:33 We recognise the following obligations: to give one-third of a shekel yearly for the service of the 
Temple of our God: 

Neh 10:34 for the loaves of permanent offering, for the perpetual oblation, for the perpetual burnt offering, for 
the sacrifices on Sabbaths, on New Moons and on festivals, for the consecrated gifts, the sin offerings to expiate 
for Israel, in short, for the whole work of the Temple of our God; 

Neh 1 0:35 Furthermore, as regards deliveries of wood for burning on the altar of our God as the law prescribes, 
we have arranged, by drawing lots, how these deliveries are to be made at the Temple of our God by the priests, 
the Levites and the people by families, at stated times every year. We will no longer neglect the Temple of our 
God. 

Neh 10:36 and further, to bring yearly to the Temple of our God the first-fruits of our soil and the first-fruits of all 
our orchards, 

Neh 10:37 also the first-born of our sons and of our cattle, as the law prescribes, the first-born of our herds and 
flocks should be taken to the Temple of our God for the priests officiating in the Temple of our God. 

Neh 1 0:38 Furthermore, we shall bring the best of our dough, of every kind of fruit, of the new wine and of the oil 
to the priests, to the storerooms of the Temple of our God, and the tithe on our soil to the Levites — the Levites 
will themselves collect the tithes from all the towns of our religion. 

Neh 10:39 An Aaronite priest will accompany the Levites when they collect the tithes, and the Levites will bring 
a tenth part 

Neh 10:40 a, b of the tithes to the Temple of our God, into the treasury storerooms; for these rooms are where 
the Israelites and the Levites are to bring the contributions of corn, wine and oil, and where the vessels of the 
sanctuary are, and the officiating priests, the gatekeepers and the singers. 

Neh 11:1 Now the leaders of the people took up residence in Jerusalem; so the rest of the people drew lots: one 
man in ten was to come and live in Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine were to stay in the towns 
outside. 

Neh 1 1 :2 The people praised all those who volunteered to live in Jerusalem. 

Neh 11:3 In the towns of Judah each man lived on his own property, but these are the provincial leaders, the 
Israelites, the priests, the Levites, the temple slaves and the descendants of Solomon’s slaves, who made their 
homes in Jerusalem: 

Neh 1 1 :4 Of the sons of Judah and the sons of Benjamin who made their homes in Jerusalem there were: Of 
the sons of Judah: Athaiah son of Uzziah, son of Zechariah, son of Amariah, son of Shephatiah, son of 
Mehalalel, of the descendants of Perez; 



Neh 1 1 :5 and Maaseiah son of Baruch, son of Col-Hozeh, son of Hazaiah, son of Adaiah, son of Joiarib, son of 
Zechariah, descendant of Shelah. 

Neh 1 1 :6 The total number of the descendants of Perez living in Jerusalem was four hundred and sixty-eight 
outstanding people. 

Neh 1 1 :7 These are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu son of Meshullam, son of Joed, son of Pedaiah, son of Kolaiah, 
son of Maaseiah, son of Ithiel, son of Jeshaiah, 

Neh 1 1 :8 and his brothers Gabbai and Sallai; nine hundred and twenty-eight. 

Neh 1 1 :9 Joel son of Zichri was their chief, and Judah son of Hassenuah was second in command of the city. 
Neh 11:10 Of the priests there were Jedaiah son of Joiakim, son of 

Neh 11:11 Seraiah, son of Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son ofZadok, son of Meraioth, son of Ahitub, the chief of 
the Temple of God, 

Neh 11:12 and their kinsmen who performed the Temple liturgy: eight hundred and twenty-two; Adaiah son of 
Jeroham, son of Pelaliah, son of Amzi, son of Zechariah, son of Pashhur, son of Malchijah, 

Neh 11:13 and his kinsfolk, heads of families: two hundred and forty-two; and Amashai son of Azarel, son of 
Ahzai, son of Meshillemoth, son of Immer, 

Neh 1 1:14 and his kinsfolk, outstanding people: one hundred and twenty-eight. Their chief was Zabdiel son of 
Haggadol. 

Neh 11:15 Of the Levites there were Shemaiah son of Hasshub, son of Azrikam, son of Hashabiah, son of 
Bunni; 

Neh 11:16 Shabbethai and Jozabad, the levitical leaders responsible for work outside the Temple of God; 

Neh 11:17 Mattaniah son of Mica, son of Zabdi, son of Asaph, who led the praises and intoned the thanksgiving 
associated with the prayer, Bakbukiah being his junior colleague; and Obadiah son of Shammua, son of Galal, 
son of Jeduthun. 

Neh 11:18 The total number of Levites in the holy city was two hundred and eighty-four. 

Neh 11:19 The gatekeepers: Akkub, Talmon and their kinsmen, who kept watch at the gates: one hundred and 
seventy-two. 

Neh 1 1 :20 The rest of Israel, including the priests and Levites, made their homes throughout the towns of 
Judah, each man on his own inheritance, 

Neh 1 1 :21 The temple slaves lived on Ophel; Ziha and Gishpa were in charge of the temple slaves. 

Neh 1 1 :22 The official in charge of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi son of Bani, son of Hashabiah, son of 
Mattaniah, son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, who led the singing in the liturgy of the Temple of God; 

Neh 1 1 :23 for the singers were under royal orders, with regulations laying down what was required of them day 
by day. 

Neh 1 1 :24 Petahiah son of Meshezabel, of the sons of Zerah son of Judah, was the king’s minister for all 
matters connected with the people. 

Neh 1 1 :25 and in the villages near their lands. Some of the sons of Judah made their homes in Kiriath-Arba and 
its dependencies, Dibon and its dependencies, Jekabzeel and its dependencies, 

Neh 11:26 Jeshua, Moladah, Beth-Pelet, 

Neh 1 1 .21 Hazar-Shual, Beersheba and its dependencies, 

Neh 11:28 Ziklag, Meconah and its dependencies, 

Neh 1 1 :29 En-Rimmon, Zorah, Jarmuth, 

Neh 1 1 :30 Zanoah, Adullam and their villages, Lachish and its lands, and Azekah and its dependencies; thus, 
they settled from Beersheba as far as the Valley of Hinnom. 

Neh 1 1 :31 And some Benjaminites made their homes in Geba, Michmash, Aija, Bethel and its dependencies, 
Neh 11:32 Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, 

Neh 11:33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim, 

Neh 11:34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, 

Neh 1 1 :35 Lod, Ono and the Valley of Craftsmen. 

Neh 1 1 :36 Some levitical groups lived in Judah, some in Benjamin. 

Neh 12:1 These are the priests and the Levites who came back with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: 
Neh 12:2 Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra, 

Neh 12:3 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 

Neh 12:4 Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah, 

Neh 12:5 Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 

Neh 12:6 Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah, 

Neh 1 2:7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah — these were the heads of the priests and their kinsmen in the days of 
Jeshua. 

Neh 12:8 The Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, Mattaniah — this last, with his brothers, 
was in charge of the songs of praise, 



Neh 12:9 while Bakbukiah and Unno, their colleagues, formed the alternate choir to theirs. 

Neh 12:10 Jeshua fathered Joiakim, Joiakim fathered Eliashib, Eliashib fathered Joiada, 

Neh 12:1 1 Joiada fathered Johanan, and Johanan fathered Jaddua. 

Neh 12:12 In the days of Joiakim the heads of the priestly families were: family of Seraiah, Meraiah; of 
Jeremiah, Hananiah; 

Neh 12:13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan; 

Neh 12:14 of Malluch, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph; 

Neh 12:15 of Harim, Adna; of Meremoth, Helkai; 

Neh 12:16 of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam; 

Neh 12:17 of Abijah, Zichri; of Minjamin, . . of Moadiah, Piltai; 

Neh 12:18 ofBilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan; 

Neh 12:19 and of Jojarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi; 

Neh 12:20 of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber; 

Neh 12:21 of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel. 

Neh 12:22 In the time of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan and Jaddua, the heads of the families of priests were 
registered in the Book of Chronicles, up to the reign of Darius the Persian. 

Neh 12:23 The Levites who were heads of families were registered in the Book of Chronicles up to the time of 
Johanan, grandson of Eliashib. 

Neh 12:24 The heads of the Levites were Hashabiah, Sherebiah, Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, while their brothers 
who formed an alternate choir for the hymns of praise and thanksgiving, as David, man of God, had prescribed, 
section corresponding to section, 

Neh 12:25 were Mattaniah, Bakbukiah and Obadiah. Meshullam, Talmon and Akkub were the gatekeepers 
guarding the stores at the gates. 

Neh 1 2:26 These lived in the days of Joiakim son of Jeshua, son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the 
governor and of Ezra the priest-scribe. 

Neh 1 2:27 At the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem the Levites were sent for, wherever they lived, to come to 
Jerusalem and joyfully perform the dedication with hymns of thanksgiving and songs to the accompaniment of 
cymbals, lyres and harps. 

Neh 12:28 Accordingly, the levitical singers assembled from the district round Jerusalem, from the villages of 
the Netophathites, 

Neh 1 2:29 from Beth-Gilgal and from their farms at Geba and Azmaveth — for the singers had built themselves 
villages all round Jerusalem. 

Neh 12:30 When the priests and Levites had purified themselves, they then purified the people, the gates and 
the wall. 

Neh 1 2:31 I then made the leaders of Judah come on to the top of the wall and appointed two large choirs. One 
made its way along the top of the wall, to the right, towards the Dung Gate; 

Neh 1 2:32 bringing up the rear were Hoshaiah and half the leaders of Judah, 

Neh 12:33 and also Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam, 

Neh 12:34 Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah and Jeremiah, 

Neh 12:35 of the priests, with trumpets; then Zechariah son of Jonathan, son of Shemaiah, son of Mattaniah, 
son of Micaiah, son of Zaccur, son of Asaph, 

Neh 12:36 with his kinsmen, Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Juda, Hanani, with the musical 
instruments of David, man of God. The scribe Ezra walked at their head. 

Neh 12:37 At the Fountain Gate they went straight on up the steps of the City of David, along the top of the 
rampart by the stairway of the wall, above the Palace of David as far as the Water Gate, on the east. 

Neh 12:38 The other choir made its way to the left; I and half the leaders of the people followed them along the 
top of the wall from the Tower of the Furnaces to the Broad Wall, 

Neh 12:39 from the Ephraim Gate, the Fish Gate, the Tower of Hananel and the Tower of the Hundred as far as 
the Sheep Gate, and they came to a halt at the Prison Gate. 

Neh 12:40 The two choirs then took their places in the Temple of God. But I had half the magistrates with me 
Neh 12:41 as well as the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, Hananiah with the 
trumpets, 

Neh 12:42 and Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam and Ezer. The singers sang 
loudly under the direction of Jezrahiah. 

Neh 12:43 There were great sacrifices offered that day and the people rejoiced, God having given them good 
cause for rejoicing; the women and children rejoiced too, and the joy of Jerusalem could be heard from far away. 
Neh 12:44 For the rooms intended for the treasures, contributions, first-fruits and tithes, supervisors were then 
appointed whose business it was to collect in them those portions from the town lands awarded by the Law to 
the priests and Levites. For Judah rejoiced in the officiating priests and Levites, 



Neh 12:45 since they — with the singers and gatekeepers — performed the liturgy of their God and the rites of 
purification as ordained by David and his son Solomon. 

Neh 1 2:46 For from ancient times, from the days of David and Asaph, they had been the leaders in rendering 
hymns of praise and thanksgiving to God. 

Neh 1 2:47 In the days of Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, all Israel supplied regular daily portions for the singers and 
gatekeepers, and gave the dedicated contributions to the Levites; and the Levites gave the dedicated 
contributions to the Aaronites. 

Neh 13:1 At that time they were reading to the people from the Book of Moses, when they found this written in it, 
“No Ammonite or Moabite is to be admitted to the assembly of God, and this is for all time, 

Neh 13:2 since they did not come to meet the Israelites with bread and water, and even hired Balaam to oppose 
them by cursing them; but our God turned the curse into a blessing”. 

Neh 13:3 Having heard the Law, they excluded all foreigners from Israel. 

Neh 13:4 Earlier, Eliashib the priest, who was in charge of the rooms of the Temple of our God, and who was 
close to Tobiah, 

Neh 13:5 had provided him with a large room where they previously used to store the meal offerings, incense, 
utensils, tithes of corn, wine and oil, that is, the part of the Levites, singers and gatekeepers, and the 
contributions for the priests. 

Neh 13:6 While all this was going on I was away from Jerusalem, for in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes king 
of Babylon I had gone to see the king. But after some time I asked the king for permission to leave, 

Neh 13:7 and returned to Jerusalem, where I learned about the crime which Eliashib had committed for Tobiah’s 
benefit, by providing him with a room in the courts of the Temple of God. 

Neh 13:8 I was extremely displeased and threw all Tobiah’s household goods out of the room and into the 
street. 

Neh 13:9 I then gave orders for the room to be purified, and had the utensils of the Temple of God, the meal 
offerings and the incense, all replaced. 

Neh 13:10 I also learned that the Levites had not been receiving their allocations, as a result of which the 
Levites and singers who performed the liturgy had all withdrawn to their farms. 

Neh 13:1 1 I then reprimanded the officials. “Why is the Temple of God deserted?”. I asked. And I collected them 
together again and brought them back to their posts; 

Neh 13:12 and all Judah then delivered the tithe of corn, wine and oil to the storehouses. 

Neh 13:13 As supervisors of the storehouses I appointed Shelemiah the priest, Zadok the scribe, Pedaiah one 
of the Levites and, as their assistant, Hanan son of Zaccur, son of Mattaniah, since they were considered 
reliable people; their duty was to make the distributions to their kinsmen. 

Neh 13:14 Remember me for this, my God, and do not blot out the good deeds which I have done for the 
Temple of my God and its observances! 

Neh 13:15 At the same time I saw people in Judah treading the winepress, bringing in sacks of grain and 
loading donkeys on the Sabbath; they were also bringing wine, grapes, figs and every kind of merchandise into 
Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I forbade them to sell the food. 

Neh 13:16 Tyrians living there were bringing in fish and every kind of merchandise which they were selling to 
the Judaeans on the Sabbath in Jerusalem itself. 

Neh 13:17 So I also reprimanded the leading men of Judah, saying to them, “What a wicked way to behave, 
profaning the Sabbath day! 

Neh 13:18 Was this not exactly what your ancestors did, with the result that our God brought all this misery 
down on us and on this city? And now you are adding to the wrath hanging over Israel by profaning the Sabbath 
yourselves!”. 

Neh 13:19 So when the gates of Jerusalem were getting dark at the approach of the Sabbath, I gave orders for 
the doors to be shut and directed that they were not to be opened again until the Sabbath was over. I stationed 
some of my attendants at the gates to make sure that no merchandise was brought in on the Sabbath day. 

Neh 13:20 So the traders and dealers in goods of all kinds spent the night outside Jerusalem once or twice, 

Neh 13:21 until I reprimanded them. I said to them, “Why are you spending the night in front of the wall? Do it 
again, and I shall use force on you”. After this, they did not come on the Sabbath. 

Neh 13:22 I then ordered the Levites to purify themselves and act as guards at the gates, so that the Sabbath 
day might be kept holy. Remember this also to my credit, have pity on me in the greatness of your faithful love. 
Neh 13:23 At that time too, I saw Jews who had married wives from Ashdod, Ammon and Moab; 

Neh 1 3:24 as regards their children, half of them spoke the language of Ashdod or the language of one of the 
other peoples, but could no longer speak the language of Judah. 

Neh 13:25 I reprimanded them, I cursed them, I struck several of them and tore out their hair and adjured them 
by God, “You are not to give your daughters in marriage to their sons or let their daughters marry your sons, or 
marry them yourselves! 



Neh 13:26 Was it not because of women like these that Solomon king of Israel sinned? Although among many 
nations there was no king like him and he was loved by his God, and God made him king of all Israel, even then 
foreign women led him into sinning! 

Neh 13:27 Were you obedient when you committed this very grave crime: breaking faith with our God by 
marrying foreign wives?”. 

Neh 1 3:28 One of the sons of Jehoiada, son of Eliashib the high priest, was a son-in-law of Sanballat the 
Horonite; I drove him from my presence. 

Neh 1 3:29 Remember them, my God, for having defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priests and 
Levites! 

Neh 13:30 And so I purged them of everything foreign; I drew up regulations for the priests and Levites, defining 
each man’s duty, 

Neh 1 3:31 as well as for the deliveries of wood at the proper times, and for the first-fruits. Remember this, my 
God, to my credit! 

Tob 1:1 The tale of Tobit son of Tobiel, son of Ananiel, son of Aduel, son of Gabael, of the lineage of Asiel and 
tribe of Naphtali. 

Tob 1 :2 In the days of Shalmaneser king of Assyria, he was exiled from Thisbe, which is south of Kedesh- 
Naphtali in Upper Galilee, above Hazor, some distance to the west, north of Shephat. 

Tob 1 :3 I, Tobit, have walked in paths of truth and in good works all the days of my life. I have given much in 
alms to my brothers and fellow country-folk, exiled like me to Nineveh in the country of Assyria. 

Tob 1 :4 In my young days, when I was still at home in the land of Israel, the whole tribe of Naphtali my ancestor 
broke away from the House of David and from Jerusalem, though this was the city chosen out of all the tribes of 
Israel for their sacrifices; here, the Temple — God’s dwelling-place — had been built and hallowed for all 
generations to come. 

Tob 1 :5 All my brothers and the House of Naphtali sacrificed on every hill-top in Galilee to the calf that 
Jeroboam king of Israel had made at Dan. 

Tob 1 :6 Often I was quite alone in making the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, fulfilling the Law that binds all Israel 
perpetually. I would hurry to Jerusalem with the first yield of fruits and beasts, the tithe of cattle and the sheep’s 
first shearings. 

Tob 1 :7 I would give these to the priests, the sons of Aaron, for the altar. To the Levites ministering at 
Jerusalem I would give my tithe of wine and corn, olives, pomegranates and other fruits. Six years in succession 
I took the second tithe in money and went and paid it annually at Jerusalem. 

Tob 1 :8 I gave the third to orphans and widows and to the strangers who live among the Israelites; I brought it 
them as a gift every three years. When we ate, we obeyed both the ordinances of the law of Moses and the 
exhortations of Deborah the mother of our ancestor Ananiel; for my father had died and left me an orphan. 

Tob 1 :9 When I came to man’s estate, I married a woman from our kinsfolk whose name was Anna; she bore 
me a son whom I called Tobias. 

Tob 1:10 When the banishment into Assyria came, I was taken away and went to Nineveh. All my brothers and 
the people of my race ate the food of the heathen, 

Tob 1:11 but for my part I was careful not to eat the food of the heathen. 

Tob 1:12 And because I had kept faith with my God with my whole heart, 

Tob 1:13 the Most High granted me the favour of Shalmaneser, and I became the king’s purveyor. 

Tob 1:14 Until his death I used to travel to Media, where I transacted business on his behalf, and I deposited 
sacks of silver worth ten talents with Gabael the brother of Gabrias at Rhages in Media. 

Tob 1:15 On the death of Shalmaneser his son Sennacherib succeeded; the roads into Media were barred, and 
I could no longer go there. 

Tob 1:16 In the days of Shalmaneser I had often given alms to the people of my race; 

Tob 1:17 I gave my bread to the hungry and clothes to those who lacked them; and I buried, when I saw them, 
the bodies of my country-folk thrown over the walls of Nineveh. 

Tob 1:18 I also buried those who were killed by Sennacherib. When Sennacherib was beating a disorderly 
retreat from Judaea after the King of heaven had punished his blasphemies, he killed a great number of 
Israelites in his rage. So I stole their bodies to bury them; Sennacherib looked for them and could not find them. 
Tob 1:19 A Ninevite went and told the king it was I who had buried them secretly. When I knew that the king had 
been told about me and saw myself being hunted by men who would put me to death, I was afraid and fled. 

Tob 1 :20 All my goods were seized; they were all confiscated by the treasury; nothing was left me but my wife 
Anna and my son Tobias. 

Tob 1 :21 Less than forty days after this, the king was murdered by his two sons, who then fled to the mountains 
of Ararat. His son Esarhaddon succeeded. Ahikar the son of my brother Anael, was appointed chancellor of the 
exchequer for the kingdom and given the main ordering of affairs. 

Tob 1 :22 Ahikar then interceded for me and I was allowed to return to Nineveh, since Ahikar had been chief 



cupbearer, keeper of the signet, administrator and treasurer under Sennacherib king of Assyria, and Esarhaddon 
had kept him in office. He was a relation of mine; he was my nephew. 

Tob 2:1 In the reign of Esarhaddon, therefore, I returned home, and my wife Anna was restored to me with my 
son Tobias. At our feast of Pentecost (the feast of Weeks) there was a good dinner. I took my place for the meal; 
Tob 2:2 the table was brought to me and various dishes were brought. I then said to my son Tobias, “Go, my 
child, and seek out some poor, loyal-hearted man among our brothers exiled in Nineveh, and bring him to share 
my meal. I will wait until you come back, my child”. 

Tob 2:3 So Tobias went out to look for some poor man among our brothers, but he came back again and said, 
“Father!”. I replied, “What is it, my child?”. He went on, “Father, one of our nation has just been murdered; he has 
been strangled and then thrown down in the market place; he is there still”. 

Tob 2:4 I sprang up at once, left my meal untouched, took the man from the market place and laid him in one of 
my rooms, waiting until sunset to bury him. 

Tob 2:5 I came in again and washed myself and ate my bread in sorrow, 

Tob 2:6 remembering the words of the prophet Amos concerning Bethel: I shall turn your festivals into mourning 
and all your singing into lamentation. 

Tob 2:7 And I wept. When the sun was down, I went and dug a grave and buried him. 

Tob 2:8 My neighbours laughed and said, “See! He is not afraid any more”. (You must remember that a price 
had been set on my head earlier for this very thing.) “Once before he had to flee, yet here he is, beginning to 
bury the dead again”. 

Tob 2:9 That night I took a bath; then I went into the courtyard and lay down by the courtyard wall. Since it was 
hot I left my face uncovered. 

Tob 2:10 I did not know that there were sparrows in the wall above my head; their hot droppings fell into my 
eyes. This caused white spots to form, which I went to have treated by the doctors. But the more ointments they 
tried me with, the more the spots blinded me, and in the end, I became completely blind. I remained without sight 
four years; all my brothers were distressed on my behalf; and Ahikar provided for my upkeep for two years, until 
he left for Elymais. 

Tob 2:11 My wife Anna then undertook woman’s work; she would spin wool and take cloth to weave; 

Tob 2:12 she used to deliver whatever had been ordered from her and then receive payment. Now on the 
seventh day of the month of Dystros, she finished a piece of work and delivered it to her customers. They paid 
her all that was due, and into the bargain presented her with a kid for a meal. 

Tob 2:13 When the kid came into my house, it began to bleat. I called to my wife and said, “Where does this 
creature come from? Suppose it has been stolen! Let the owners have it back; we have no right to eat stolen 
goods”. 

Tob 2:14 She said, “No, it was a present given me over and above my wages”. I did not believe her, and told her 
to give it back to the owners (I felt deeply ashamed of her). To which, she replied, “What about your own alms? 
What about your own good works? Everyone knows what return you have had for them”. 

Tob 3:1 Then, sad at heart, I sighed and wept, and began this prayer of lamentation: 

Tob 3:2 You are just, O Lord, and just are all your works. All your ways are grace and truth, and you are the 
Judge of the world. 

Tob 3:3 Therefore, Lord, remember me, look on me. Do not punish me for my sins or for my needless faults or 
those of my ancestors. 

Tob 3:4 For we have sinned against you and broken your commandments; and you have given us over to be 
plundered, to captivity and death, to be the talk, the laughing-stock and scorn of all the nations among whom you 
have dispersed us. 

Tob 3:5 And now all your decrees are true when you deal with me as my faults deserve, and those of my 
ancestors. For we have neither kept your commandments nor walked in truth before you. 

Tob 3:6 So now, do with me as you will; be pleased to take my life from me; so that I may be delivered from 
earth and become earth again. Better death than life for me, for I have endured groundless insult and am in 
deepest sorrow. Lord, be pleased to deliver me from this affliction. Let me go away to my everlasting home; do 
not turn your face from me, O Lord. Better death for me than life prolonged in the face of unrelenting misery: I 
can no longer bear to listen to insults. 

Tob 3:7 It chanced on the same day that Sarah the daughter of Raguel, who lived in Media at Ecbatana, also 
heard insults from one of her father’s maids. 

Tob 3:8 For she had been given in marriage seven times, and Asmodeus, the worst of demons, had killed her 
bridegrooms one after another before ever they had slept with her as man with wife. The servant-girl said, “Yes, 
you kill your bridegrooms yourself. That makes seven already to whom you have been given, and you have not 
once been in luck yet. 

Tob 3:9 Just because your bridegrooms have died, that is no reason for punishing us. Go and join them, and 
may we be spared the sight of any child of yours!”. 



Tob 3:10 That day, she grieved, she sobbed, and she went up to her father’s room intending to hang herself. 

But then she thought, “Suppose they were to blame my father! They would say, ‘You had an only daughter 
whom you loved, and now she has hanged herself for grief’. I cannot cause my father a sorrow which would 
bring down his old age to the dwelling of the dead. I should do better not to hang myself, but to beg the Lord to 
let me die and not live to hear any more insults”. 

Tob 3:1 1 And at this, by the window, with outstretched arms she said this prayer: You are blessed, O God of 
mercy! May your name be blessed for ever, and may all things you have made bless you everlastingly. 

Tob 3:12 And now I turn my face and I raise my eyes to you. 

Tob 3:13 Let your word deliver me from earth; I can hear myself insulted no longer. 

Tob 3:14 O Lord, you know that I have remained pure; no man has touched me; 

Tob 3:15 I have not dishonoured your name or my father’s name in this land of exile. I am my father’s only 
daughter, he has no other child as heir; he has no brother at his side, nor has he any kinsman left for whom I 
ought to keep myself. I have lost seven husbands already; why should I live any longer? If it does not please you 
to take my life, then look on me with pity; I can no longer bear to hear myself defamed. 

Tob 3:16 This time the prayer of each of them found favour before the glory of God, 

Tob 3:17 and Raphael was sent to bring remedy to them both. He was to take the white spots from the eyes of 
Tobit, so that he might see God’s light with his own eyes; and he was to give Sarah the daughter of Raguel as 
bride to Tobias son of Tobit, and to rid her of Asmodeus, that worst of demons. For it was to Tobias before all 
other suitors that she belonged by right. Tobit was coming back from the courtyard into the house at the same 
moment as Sarah the daughter of Raguel was coming down from the upper room. 

Tob 4:1 The same day Tobit remembered the silver that he had left with Gabael at Rhages in Media 

Tob 4:2 and thought, “I have come to the point of praying for death; I should do well to call my son Tobias and 

tell him about the money before I die”. 

Tob 4:3 He summoned his son Tobias and told him, “When I die, give me an honourable burial. Honour your 
mother, and never abandon her all the days of your life. Do all that she wants, and give her no reason for sorrow. 
Tob 4:4 Remember, my child, all the risks she ran for your sake when you were in her womb. And when she 
dies, bury her at my side in the same grave. 

Tob 4:5 “My child, be faithful to the Lord all your days. Never entertain the will to sin or to transgress his laws. 

Do good works all the days of your life, never follow ways that are not upright; 

Tob 4:6 for if you act in truthfulness, you will be successful in all your actions, as everyone is who practises what 
is upright. 

Tob 4:7 “Set aside part of your goods for almsgiving. Never turn your face from the poor and God will never turn 
his from you. 

Tob 4:8 Measure your alms by what you have; if you have much, give more; if you have little, do not be afraid to 
give less in alms. 

Tob 4:9 So doing, you will lay up for yourself a great treasure for the day of necessity. 

Tob 4:10 For almsgiving delivers from death and saves people from passing down to darkness. 

Tob 4:11 Almsgiving is a most effective offering for all those who do it in the presence of the Most High. 

Tob 4:12 “My child, avoid all loose conduct. Choose a wife of your father’s stock. Do not take a foreign wife 
outside your father’s tribe, because we are the children of the prophets. Remember Noah, Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob, our ancestors from the beginning. All of them took wives from their own kindred, and they were blessed in 
their children, and their race will inherit the earth. 

Tob 4:13 You, too, my child, must love your own brothers; never presume to despise your brothers, the sons 
and daughters of your people; choose your wife from among them. For pride brings ruin and much worry; 
idleness causes need and poverty, for the mother of famine is idleness. 

Tob 4:14 “Do not keep back until next day the wages of those who work for you; pay them at once. If you serve 
God you will be rewarded. Be careful, my child, in all you do, well-disciplined in all your behaviour. 

Tob 4:15 Do to no one what you would not want done to you. Do not drink wine to the point of drunkenness; do 
not let excess be your travelling companion. 

Tob 4:16 “Give your bread to those who are hungry, and your clothes to those who lack clothing. Of whatever 
you own in plenty, devote a proportion to almsgiving; and when you give alms, do it ungrudgingly. 

Tob 4:17 Be generous with bread and wine on the graves of upright people, but not for the sinner. 

Tob 4:18 “Ask advice of every wise person; never scorn any profitable advice. 

Tob 4:19 Bless the Lord God in everything; beg him to guide your ways and bring your paths and purposes to 
their end. For wisdom is not the property of every nation; their desire for what is good is conferred by the Lord. At 
his will he lifts up or he casts down to the depths of the dwelling of the dead. So now, my child, remember these 
precepts and never let them fade from your heart. 

Tob 4:20 “Now, my child, I must tell you I have left ten talents of silver with Gabael son of Gabrias, at Rhages in 
Media. 



Tob 4:21 Do not be afraid, my child, if we have grown poor. You have great wealth if you fear God, if you shun 
every kind of sin and if you do what is pleasing to the Lord your God”. 

Tob 5:1 Tobias then replied to his father Tobit, “Father, I shall do everything you have told me. 

Tob 5:2 But how am I to recover the silver from him? He does not know me, nor I him. What token am I to give 
him for him to believe me and hand the silver over to me? And besides, I do not know what roads to take for this 
journey into Media”. 

Tob 5:3 Then Tobit answered his son Tobias, “Each of us set his signature to a note which I cut in two, so that 
each could keep half of it. I took one piece, and put the other with the silver. To think it was twenty years ago I 
left this silver in his keeping! And now, my child, find a trustworthy travelling companion — we shall pay him for 
his time until you arrive back — and then go and collect the silver from Gabael”. 

Tob 5:4 Tobias went out to look for a man who knew the way to go with him to Media. Outside he found 
Raphael the angel standing facing him, though he did not guess he was an angel of God. 

Tob 5:5 He said, “Where do you come from, friend?”. The angel replied, “I am one of your brother Israelites; I 
have come to these parts to look for work”. Tobias asked, “Do you know the road to Media?”. 

Tob 5:6 The other replied, “Certainly I do, I have been there many times; I have knowledge and experience of all 
the ways. I have often been to Media and stayed with Gabael one of our kinsmen who lives at Rhages in Media. 
It usually takes two full days to get from Ecbatana to Rhages; Rhages lies in the mountains, and Ecbatana is in 
the middle of the plain”. 

Tob 5:7 Tobias said, “Wait for me, friend, while I go and tell my father; I need you to come with me; I shall pay 
you for your time”. 

Tob 5:8 The other replied, “Good, I shall wait; but do not be long”. 

Tob 5:9 Tobias went in and told his father that he had found one of their brother Israelites. And the father said, 
“Fetch him in; I want to find out about his family and tribe. I must see if he is going to be a reliable companion for 
you, my child”. So Tobias went out and called him, “Friend”, he said, “my father wants you”. 

Tob 5:10 The angel came into the house; Tobit greeted him, and the other answered, wishing him happiness in 
plenty. Tobit replied, “Can I ever be happy again? I am a blind man; I no longer see the light of heaven; I am 
sunk in darkness like the dead who see the light no more. I am a man buried alive; I hear people speak but 
cannot see them”. The angel said, “Take comfort; before long God will heal you. Take comfort”. Tobit said, “My 
son Tobias wishes to go to Media. Will you join him as his guide? Brother, I will pay you”. He replied, “I am willing 
to go with him; I know all the ways; I have often been to Media, I have crossed all its plains and mountains, and I 
know all its roads”. 

Tob 5:1 1 Tobit said, “Brother, what family and what tribe do you belong to? Will you tell me, brother?”. 

Tob 5:12 “What does my tribe matter to you?”. the angel said. Tobit said, “I want to be quite sure whose son you 
are and what your name is”. 

Tob 5:13 The angel said, “I am Azarias, son of the great Ananias, one of your kinsmen”. 

Tob 5:14 “Welcome and greetings, brother! Do not be offended at my wanting to know the name of your family; I 
find you are my kinsman of a good and honourable line. I know Ananias and Nathan, the two sons of the great 
Shemaiah. They used to go to Jerusalem with me; we have worshipped together there and they have never 
strayed from the right path. Your brothers are worthy men; you come of good stock; welcome”. 

Tob 5:15 He went on, “I engage you at a drachma a day, with the same expenses as my own son’s. Complete 
the journey with my son 

Tob 5:16 and I shall go beyond the agreed wage”. The angel replied, “I shall complete the journey with him. Do 
not be afraid. On the journey outward all will be well; on the journey back all will be well; the road is safe”. 

Tob 5:17 Tobit said, “Blessings on you, brother!”. Then he turned to his son. “My child”, he said, “prepare what you 
need for the journey, and set off with your brother. May God in heaven protect you abroad and bring you both 
back to me safe and sound! May his angel go with you and protect you, my child!”. Tobias left the house to set 
out and kissed his father and mother. Tobit said, “A happy journey!”. 

Tob 5:18 His mother burst into tears and said to Tobit, “Why must you send my child away? Is he not the staff of 
our hands, as he goes about before us? 

Tob 5:19 Surely money is not the only thing that matters? Surely it is not as precious as our child? 

Tob 5:20 The way of life God had already given us was good enough”. 

Tob 5:21 He said, “Do not think such thoughts. Going away and coming back, all will be well with our child. You 
will see for yourself when he comes back safe and sound! Do not think such thoughts; do not worry on their 
account, my sister. 

Tob 5:22 A good angel will go with him; he will have a good journey and come back to us well and happy”. 

Tob 6:1 And she dried her tears. 

Tob 6:2 The boy left with the angel, and the dog followed behind. The two walked on, and when the first evening 
came they camped beside the Tigris. 

Tob 6:3 The boy had gone down to the river to wash his feet, when a great fish leapt out of the water and tried 



to swallow his foot. The boy gave a shout 

Tob 6:4 and the angel said, “Catch the fish; do not let it go”. The boy mastered the fish and pulled it onto the 
bank. 

Tob 6:5 The angel said, “Cut it open; take out gall, heart and liver; set these aside and throw the entrails away, 
for gall and heart and liver have curative properties”. 

Tob 6:6 The boy cut the fish open and took out gall and heart and liver. He fried part of the fish for his meal and 
kept some for salting. Then they walked on again together until they were nearly in Media. 

Tob 6:7 Then the boy asked the angel this question, “Brother Azarias, what can the fish’s heart, liver and gall 
cure?”. 

Tob 6:8 He replied, “You burn the fish’s heart and liver, and their smoke is used in the case of a man or woman 
plagued by a demon or evil spirit; any such affliction disappears for good, leaving no trace. 

Tob 6:9 As regards the gall, this is used as an eye ointment for anyone having white spots on his eyes; after 
using it, you have only to blow on the spots to cure them”. 

Tob 6:10 They entered Media and had nearly reached Ecbatana 

Tob 6:1 1 when Raphael said to the boy, “Brother Tobias”. “Yes?”. he replied. The angel went on, “Tonight we are 
to stay with Raguel, who is a kinsman of yours. He has a daughter called Sarah, 

Tob 6:12 but apart from Sarah he has no other son or daughter. Now you are her next of kin; she belongs to you 
before anyone else and you may claim her father’s inheritance. She is a thoughtful, courageous and very lovely 
girl, and her father loves her dearly. 

Tob 6:13 You have the right to marry her. Listen, brother; this very evening I shall speak about the girl to her 
father and arrange for her to be betrothed to you, and when we come back from Rhages we can celebrate the 
marriage. I assure you, Raguel has no right whatever to refuse you or to betroth her to anyone else. That would 
be asking for death, as prescribed in the Book of Moses, once he is aware that kinship gives you the preëminent right to marry his daughter. So listen, brother. This very evening we shall speak about the girl and ask 
for her hand in marriage. When we come back from Rhages we shall fetch her and take her home with us”. 

Tob 6:14 Tobias replied to Raphael, “Brother Azarias, I have been told that she has already been given in 
marriage seven times and that each time her bridegroom has died in the bridal room. He died the same night as 
he entered her room; and I have heard people say it was a demon that killed them, 

Tob 6:15 and this makes me afraid. To her the demon does no harm because he loves her, but as soon as a 
man tries to approach her, he kills him. I am my father’s only son, and I have no wish to die. I do not want my 
father and mother to grieve over me for the rest of their lives; they have no other son to bury them”. 

Tob 6:16 The angel said, “Have you forgotten your father’s advice? After all, he urged you to choose a wife from 
your father’s family. Listen then, brother. Do not worry about the demon; take her. This very evening, I promise, 
she will be given you as your wife. 

Tob 6:17 Then once you are in the bridal room, take the heart and liver of the fish and lay a little of it on the 
burning incense. The reek will rise, 

Tob 6:18 the demon will smell it and flee, and there is no danger that he will ever be found near the girl again. 
Then, before you sleep together, first stand up, both of you, and pray. Ask the Lord of heaven to grant you his 
grace and protection. Do not be afraid; she was destined for you from the beginning, and you are the one to 
save her. She will follow you, and I pledge my word she will give you children who will be like brothers to you. Do 
not worry”. And when Tobias heard Raphael say this, when he understood that Sarah was his sister, a 
kinswoman of his father’s family, he fell so deeply in love with her that he could no longer call his heart his own. 
Tob 7:1 As they entered Ecbatana, Tobias said, “Brother Azarias, take me at once to our brother Raguel’s”. And 
he showed him the way to the house of Raguel, whom they found sitting beside his courtyard door. They greeted 
him first, and he replied, “Welcome and greetings, brothers”. And he took them into his house. 

Tob 7:2 He said to his wife Edna, “How like my brother Tobit this young man is!”. 

Tob 7:3 Edna asked them where they came from; they said, “We are sons of Naphtali exiled in Nineveh”. 

Tob 7:4 “Do you know our brother Tobit?”. “Yes”. “How is he?”. 

Tob 7:5 “He is alive and well”. And Tobias added, “He is my father”. 

Tob 7:6 Raguel leapt to his feet and kissed him and wept. 

Tob 7:7 Then, finding words, he said, “Blessings on you, child! You are the son of a noble father. How sad it is 
that someöne so bright and full of good deeds should have gone blind!”. He fell on the neck of his kinsman Tobias 
and wept. 

Tob 7:8 And his wife Edna wept for him, and so did his daughter Sarah. 

Tob 7:9 Raguel killed a ram from the flock, and they gave them a warm welcome. They washed and bathed and 
sat down to table. Then Tobias said to Raphael, “Brother Azarias, will you ask Raguel to give me my sister 
Sarah?”. 

Tob 7:10 Raguel overheard the words, and said to the young man, “Eat and drink, and make the most of your 
evening; no one else has the right to take my daughter Sarah — no one but you, my brother. In any case even I 



am not at liberty to give her to anyone else, since you are her next of kin. However, my boy, I must be frank with 
you: 

Tob 7:1 1 I have tried to find a husband for her seven times among our kinsmen, and all of them have died the 
first evening, on going to her room. But for the present, my boy, eat and drink; the Lord will grant you his grace 
and peace”. Tobias spoke out, “I will not hear of eating and drinking till you have come to a decision about me”. 
Raguel answered, “Very well. Since, by the prescription of the Book of Moses she is given to you, Heaven itself 
decrees she shall be yours. I therefore entrust your sister to you. From now on you are her brother and she is 
your sister. She is given to you from today for ever. The Lord of heaven favour you tonight, my child, and grant 
you his grace and peace”. 

Tob 7:12 Raguel called for his daughter Sarah, took her by the hand and gave her to Tobias with these words, “I 
entrust her to you; the law and the ruling recorded in the Book of Moses assign her to you as your wife. Take 
her; bring her home safe and sound to your father’s house. The God of heaven grant you a good journey in 
peace”. 

Tob 7:13 Then he turned to her mother and asked her to fetch him writing paper. He drew up the marriage 
contract, and so he gave his daughter as bride to Tobias according to the ordinance of the Law of Moses. 

Tob 7:14 After this they began to eat and drink. 

Tob 7:15 Raguel called his wife Edna and said, “My sister, prepare the second room and take her there”. 

Tob 7:16 She went and made the bed in this room as he had ordered, and took her daughter to it. She wept 
over her, then wiped away her tears and said, “Courage, daughter! May the Lord of heaven turn your grief to joy! 
Courage, daughter!”. And she went out. 

Tob 8:1 When they had finished eating and drinking and it seemed time to go to bed, the young man was taken 
from the dining room to the bedroom. 

Tob 8:2 Tobias remembered Raphael’s advice; he went to his bag, took the fish’s heart and liver out of it and put 
some on the burning incense. 

Tob 8:3 The reek of the fish distressed the demon, who fled through the air to Egypt. Raphael pursued him 
there, shackled him and strangled him forthwith. 

Tob 8:4 The parents meanwhile had gone out and shut the door behind them. Tobias rose from the bed, and 
said to Sarah, “Get up, my sister! You and I must pray and petition our Lord to win his grace and his protection”. 
Tob 8:5 She stood up, and they began praying for protection, and this was how he began: You are blessed, O 
God of our fathers; blessed too is your name for ever and ever. Let the heavens bless you and all things you 
have made for evermore. 

Tob 8:6 You it was who created Adam, you who created Eve his wife to be his help and support; and from these 
two the human race was born. You it was who said, “It is not right that the man should be alone; let us make him 
a helper like him”. 

Tob 8:7 And so I take my sister not for any lustful motive, but I do it in singleness of heart. Be kind enough to 
have pity on her and on me and bring us to old age together. 

Tob 8:8 And together they said, “Amen, Amen”, 

Tob 8:9 and lay down for the night. But Raguel rose and called his servants, who came and helped him dig a 
grave. 

Tob 8:10 He had thought, “Heaven grant he does not die! We should be overwhelmed with ridicule and shame”. 
Tob 8:1 1 When the grave was ready, Raguel went back to the house, called his wife 

Tob 8:12 and said, “Will you send a maid to the room to see if Tobias is still alive? For if he is dead, we may be 
able to bury him without anyone else knowing”. 

Tob 8:13 They sent the maid, lit the lamp, opened the door and the maid went in. She found the two fast asleep 
together; 

Tob 8:14 she came out again and whispered, “He is not dead; all is well”. 

Tob 8:15 Then Raguel blessed the God of heaven with these words: You are blessed, my God, with every 
blessing that is pure; may you be blessed for evermore! 

Tob 8:16 You are blessed for having made me glad. What I feared has not happened, instead you have shown 
us your boundless mercy. 

Tob 8:17 You are blessed for taking pity on this only son, this only daughter. Grant them, Master, your mercy 
and your protection; let them live out their lives in happiness and in mercy. 

Tob 8:18 And he made his servants fill the grave in before dawn broke. 

Tob 8:19 He told his wife to make an ovenful of bread; he went to his flock, brought back two oxen and four 
sheep and gave orders for them to be cooked; and preparations began. 

Tob 8:20 He called Tobias and said, “I will not hear of your leaving here for a fortnight. You are to stay where 
you are, eating and drinking, with me. You will make my daughter happy again after all her troubles. 

Tob 8:21 After that, take away a half of all I have, and take her safe and sound back to your father. When my 
wife and I are dead you shall have the other half. Courage, my boy! I am your father, and Edna is your mother. 



We are your parents in future, as we are your sister’s. Courage, my son!”. 

Tob 9:1 Then Tobias turned to Raphael. 

Tob 9:2 “Brother Azarias”, he said, “take four servants and two camels and leave for Rhages. 

Tob 9:3 Go to Gabael’s house, give him the receipt and see about the money; then invite him to come with you 
to my wedding feast. 

Tob 9:4 You know that my father must be counting the days and that I cannot lose a single one without worrying 
him. 

Tob 9:5 You see what Raguel has pledged himself to do; I am bound by his oath”. So Raphael left for Rhages in 
Media with the four servants and two camels. They stayed with Gabael, and Raphael showed him the receipt. 

He told him about the marriage of Tobias son of Tobit and gave him his invitation to the wedding feast. Gabael 
started counting out the sacks to him — the seals were intact — and they loaded them on to the camels. 

Tob 9:6 Early in the morning they set off together for the feast, and reached Raguel’s house where they found 
Tobias dining. He rose to greet Gabael, who burst into tears and blessed him with the words, “Excellent son of a 
father beyond reproach, just and generous in his dealings! The Lord give heaven’s blessing to you, to your wife, 
to your wife’s father and mother! Blessed be God for granting me the sight of this living image of my cousin 
Tobit!”. 

Tob 10:1 Every day, meanwhile, Tobit kept reckoning the days required for the journey there and the journey 
back. The full number went by, and still his son had not come. 

Tob 10:2 Then he thought, “I hope he has not been delayed there! I hope Gabael is not dead, so that no one will 
give him the silver”. 

Tob 10:3 And he began to worry. 

Tob 10:4 His wife Anna kept saying, “My son is dead! He is no longer among the living!”. And she began to weep 
and mourn over her son. She kept saying, 

Tob 10:5 “Alas! I should never have let you leave me, my child, you, the light of my eyes”. 

Tob 10:6 And Tobit would reply, “Hush, my sister! Do not worry. All is well with him. Something has happened 
there to delay them. His companion is someöne we can trust, one of our kinsmen at that. Do not lose heart, my 
sister. 

Tob 10:7 He will soon be here”. But all she would say was, “Leave me alone; do not try to deceive me. My child 
is dead”. And every day she would go abruptly out to watch the road by which her son had left. She trusted no 
eyes but her own. Once the sun had set she would come home again, only to weep and moan all night, unable 
to sleep. After the fourteen days of feasting that Raguel had sworn to keep for his daughter’s marriage, Tobias 
came to him and said, “Let me go now; my father and mother must have lost all hope of seeing me again. So I 
beg you, father, to let me return to my father’s house; I have told you the plight he was in when I left him”. 

Tob 10:8 Raguel said to Tobias, “Stay, my son, stay with me. I shall send messengers to your father Tobit to 
give him news of you”. 

Tob 10:9 But Tobias pressed him, “No, I beg you to let me go back to my father’s house”. 

Tob 10:10 Without more ado, Raguel committed Sarah his bride into his keeping. He gave Tobias half his 
wealth, slaves, men and women, oxen and sheep, donkeys and camels, clothes and money and household 
things. 

Tob 10:1 1 And so he let them leave happily. To Tobias he said these parting words, “Good health, my son, and 
a happy journey! May the Lord of heaven be gracious to you and to your wife Sarah! I hope to see your children 
before I die”. 

Tob 10:12 To his daughter Sarah he said, “Go now to your father-in-law’s house, since henceforward they are 
as much your parents as those who gave you life. Go in peace, my daughter, I hope to hear nothing but good of 
you, as long as I live”. He said goodbye to them and let them go. Edna in her turn said to Tobias, “Dear son and 
brother, may it please the Lord to bring you back again! I hope to live long enough to see the children of you and 
my daughter Sarah before I die. In the sight of the Lord I give my daughter into your keeping. Never make her 
unhappy as long as you live. Go in peace, my son. Henceforward I am your mother and Sarah is your sister. 

May we all live happily for the rest of our lives!”. And she kissed them both and saw them set out happily. 

Tob 10:13 Tobias left Raguel’s house with his mind at ease. In his gladness he blessed the Lord of heaven and 
earth, the King of all that is, for the happy issue of his travels. He gave this blessing to Raguel and his wife Edna, 
“May it be my happiness to honour you for the rest of my life!”. 

Tob 1 1:1 They were nearly at Kaserin, opposite Nineveh, 

Tob 1 1 :2 when Raphael said, “You know the plight in which we left your father; 

Tob 1 1 :3 let us go on ahead of your wife and prepare the house ourselves while she travels behind with the 
others”. 

Tob 1 1 :4 They went on together (Raphael warned Tobias to take the gall with him) and the dog followed them. 
Tob 1 1 :5 Anna was sitting, watching the road by which her son would come. 

Tob 1 1 :6 She was sure at once it must be he and said to the father, “Here comes your son, with his companion”. 



Tob 1 1 :7 Raphael said to Tobias before he reached his father, “I give you my word that your father’s eyes will 
open. 

Tob 1 1 :8 You must put the fish’s gall to his eyes; the medicine will smart and will draw a filmy white skin off his 
eyes. And your father will no more be blind but will be able to see the light”. 

Tob 1 1 :9 The mother ran forward and threw her arms round her son’s neck. “Now I can die”, she said, “I have 
seen you again”. And she wept. 

Tob 11:10 Tobit rose to his feet and stumbled across the courtyard through the door. Tobias came on towards 
him 

Tob 11:11 (he had the fish’s gall in his hand). He blew into his eyes and said, steadying him, “Take courage, 
father!”. With this he applied the medicine, left it there a while, 

Tob 11:12 then with both hands peeled away a filmy skin from the corners of his eyes. 

Tob 11:13 Then his father fell on his neck 

Tob 11:14 and wept. He exclaimed, “I can see you, my son, the light of my eyes!”. And he said: Blessed be God! 
Blessed be his great name! Blessed be all his holy angels! Blessed be his great name for evermore! 

Tob 11:15 For, having afflicted me, he has had pity on me and now I see my son Tobias! Tobias went indoors, 
joyfully blessing God at the top of his voice. Then he told his father everything; how his journey had been 
successful and he had brought the silver back; how he had married Sarah the daughter of Raguel; how she was 
following him now, close behind, and could not be far from the gates of Nineveh. 

Tob 11:16 Tobit set off to the gates of Nineveh to meet his daughter-in-law, giving joyful praise to God as he 
went. When the people of Nineveh saw him walking without a guide and stepping forward as briskly as of old, 
they were astonished. 

Tob 11:17 Tobit described to them how God had taken pity on him and had opened his eyes. Then Tobit met 
Sarah the bride of his son Tobias, and blessed her in these words. “Welcome, daughter! Blessed be your God for 
sending you to us, my daughter. Blessings on your father, blessings on my son Tobias, blessings on yourself, 
my daughter. Welcome now to your own house in joyfulness and in blessedness. Come in, my daughter”. That 
day brought joy to the Jews of Nineveh, 

Tob 11:18 and his cousins Ahikar and Nadab came to share in Tobit’s happiness. 

Tob 12:1 When the wedding feast was over, Tobit called his son Tobias and said, “My son, you ought to think 
about paying the amount due to your fellow traveller; give him more than the figure agreed on”. 

Tob 12:2 “Father”, he replied, “how much am I to give him for his help? Even if I give him half the goods he 
brought back with me, I shall not be the loser. 

Tob 12:3 He has brought me back safe and sound, he has cured my wife, he has brought the money back too, 
and now he has cured you as well. How much am I to give him for all this?”. 

Tob 12:4 Tobit said, “He has richly earned half what he brought back”. 

Tob 12:5 So Tobias called his companion and said, “Take half of what you brought back, in payment for all you 
have done, and go in peace”. 

Tob 12:6 Then Raphael took them both aside and said, “Bless God, utter his praise before all the living for the 
favour he has shown you. Bless and extol his name. Proclaim before all people the deeds of God as they 
deserve, and never tire of giving him thanks. 

Tob 12:7 It is right to keep the secret of a king, yet right to reveal and publish the works of God as they deserve. 
Do what is good, and no evil can befall you. 

Tob 12:8 “Prayer with fasting and alms with uprightness are better than riches with iniquity. Better to practise 
almsgiving than to hoard up gold. 

Tob 12:9 Almsgiving saves from death and purges every kind of sin. Those who give alms have their fill of days; 
Tob 12:10 those who commit sin and do evil bring harm on themselves. 

Tob 12:1 1 “I am going to tell you the whole truth, hiding nothing from you. I have already told you that it is right 
to keep the secret of a king, yet right too to reveal in a worthy way the words of God. 

Tob 12:12 So you must know that when you and Sarah were at prayer, it was I who offered your supplications 
before the glory of the Lord and who read them; so too when you were burying the dead. 

Tob 12:13 When you did not hesitate to get up and leave the table to go and bury a dead man, I was sent to test 
your faith, 

Tob 12:14 and at the same time God sent me to heal you and your daughter-in-law Sarah. 

Tob 12:15 I am Raphael, one of the seven angels who stand ever ready to enter the presence of the glory of the 
Lord”. 

Tob 12:16 They were both overwhelmed with awe; they fell on their faces in terror. 

Tob 12:17 But the angel said, “Do not be afraid; peace be with you. Bless God for ever. 

Tob 12:18 As far as I was concerned, when I was with you, my presence was not by any decision of mine, but 
by the will of God; he is the one whom you must bless as long as you live, he the one that you must praise. 

Tob 12:19 You thought you saw me eating, but that was appearance and no more. 



Tob 12:20 Now bless the Lord on earth and give thanks to God. I am about to return to him who sent me from 
above. Write down all that has happened”. And he rose in the air. 

Tob 12:21 When they stood up again, he was no longer visible. They praised God with hymns; they thanked him 
for having performed such wonders; had not an angel of God appeared to them? 

Tob 13:1 And he said: Blessed be God who lives for ever, for his reign endures throughout all ages! 

Tob 13:2 For he both punishes and pardons; he sends people down to the depths of the underworld and draws 
them up from utter Destruction; no one can escape his hand. 

Tob 13:3 Declare his praise before the nations, you who are the children of Israel! For if he has scattered you 
among them, 

Tob 13:4 there too he has shown you his greatness. Extol him before all the living; he is our Lord and he is our 
God; he is our Father, and he is God for ever and ever. 

Tob 1 3:5 Though he punishes you for your iniquities, he will take pity on you all; he will gather you from every 
nation wherever you have been scattered. 

Tob 1 3:6 If you return to him with all your heart and all your soul, behaving honestly towards him, then he will 
return to you and hide his face from you no longer. Consider how well he has treated you; loudly give him 
thanks. Bless the Lord of justice and extol the King of the ages. I for my part sing his praise in the country of my 
exile; I make his power and greatness known to a nation that has sinned. Sinners, return to him; let your conduct 
be upright before him; perhaps he will be gracious to you and take pity on you. 

Tob 13:7 I for my part extol God and my soul rejoices in the King of heaven. Let his greatness 
Tob 13:8 be on every tongue, his praises be sung in Jerusalem. 

Tob 1 3:9 Jerusalem, Holy City, God has scourged you for what you have done but will still take pity on the 
children of the upright. 

Tob 13:10 Thank the Lord as he deserves and bless the King of the ages, that your Temple may be rebuilt with 
joy within you; within you he may comfort every exile, and within you he may love all those who are distressed, 
for all generations to come. 

Tob 13:1 1 A bright light will shine over all the regions of the earth; many nations will come from far away, from 
all the ends of the earth, to dwell close to the holy name of the Lord God, with gifts in their hands for the King of 
heaven. Within you, generation after generation will proclaim their joy, and the name of her who is Elect will 
endure through the generations to come. 

Tob 13:12 Cursed be any who affront you, cursed be any who destroy you, who throw down your walls, who 
rase your towers, who burn your houses! Eternally blessed be he who rebuilds you! 

Tob 13:13 Then you will exult, and rejoice over the children of the upright, for they will all have been gathered in 
and will bless the Lord of the ages. 

Tob 13:14 Blessed are those who love you, blessed those who rejoice over your peace, blessed those who 
have mourned over all your punishment! For they will soon rejoice within you, witness all your blessedness in 
days to come. 

Tob 13:15 My soul blesses the Lord, the great King 

Tob 13:16 because Jerusalem will be built anew and his house for ever and ever. What bliss, if one of my family 
be left to see your glory and praise the King of heaven! The gates of Jerusalem will be built of sapphire and of 
emerald, and all your walls of precious stone, the towers of Jerusalem will be built of gold and their battlements 
of pure gold. 

Tob 13:17 The streets of Jerusalem will be paved with ruby and with stones from Ophir; the gates of Jerusalem 
will resound with songs of exultation; and all her houses will say, “Alleluia! Blessed be the God of Israel”. Within 
you they will bless the holy name for ever and ever. 

Tob 14:1 The end of the hymns of Tobit. Tobit died when he was a hundred and twelve years old and received 
an honourable burial in Nineveh. 

Tob 14:2 He had been sixty-two when he went blind; and after his cure, he lived in comfort, practising 
almsgiving and continually praising God and extolling his greatness. 

Tob 14:3 When he was at the point of death he summoned his son Tobias and gave him these instructions, 

Tob 14:4 “My son, take your children and hurry away to Media, since I believe the word of God pronounced over 
Nineveh by Nahum. Everything will come true, everything happen that the emissaries of God, the prophets of 
Israel, have predicted against Assyria and Nineveh; not one of their words will prove empty. It will all take place 
in due time. You will be safer in Media than in Assyria or in Babylonia. Since I for my part know and believe that 
everything God has said will come true; so it will be, and not a word of the prophecies will fail. “A census will be 
taken of our brothers living in the land of Israel and they will be exiled far from their own fair country. The entire 
territory of Israel will become a desert, and Samaria and Jerusalem will become a desert, and the house of God, 
for a time, will be laid waste and burnt. 

Tob 14:5 Then once again God will take pity on them and bring them back to the land of Israel. They will rebuild 
his house, although it will be less beautiful than the first, until the time is fulfilled. But after this, all will return from 



captivity and rebuild Jerusalem in all her glory, and the house of God will be rebuilt within her as the prophets of 
Israel have foretold. 

Tob 14:6 And all the people of the whole earth will be converted and will reverence God with all sincerity. All will 
renounce their false gods who have led them astray into error, 

Tob 14:7 and will bless the God of ages in uprightness. All the Israelites spared in those days will remember 
God in sincerity of heart. They will come and gather in Jerusalem and thereafter dwell securely in the land of 
Abraham, which will be theirs. And those who sincerely love God will rejoice. And those who commit sin and 
wickedness will vanish from the earth. 

Tob 14:8 “And now, my children, I lay this duty on you; serve God sincerely, and do what is pleasing to him. And 
lay on your children the obligation to behave uprightly, to give alms, to keep God in mind and to bless his name 
always, sincerely and with all their might. 

Tob 14:9 “So then, my son, leave Nineveh, do not stay here. 

Tob 14:10 As soon as you have buried your mother next to me, go the same day, whenever it may be, and do 
not linger in this country where I see wickedness and perfidy unashamedly triumphant. Consider, my child, all 
the things done by Nadab to his foster-father Ahikar. Was not Ahikar forced to go underground, though still a 
living man? But God made the criminal pay for his outrage before his victim’s eyes, since Ahikar came back to 
the light of day, while Nadab went down to everlasting darkness in punishment for plotting against Ahikar’s life. 
Because of his good works Ahikar escaped the deadly snare Nadab had laid for him, and Nadab fell into it to his 
own ruin. 

Tob 14:1 1 So, my children, you see what comes of almsgiving, and what wickedness leads to, I mean to death. 
But now breath fails me”. They laid him back on his bed; he died and was buried with honour. 

Tob 14:12 When his mother died, Tobias buried her beside his father. Then he left for Media with his wife and 
children. He lived in Ecbatana with Raguel, his father-in-law. 

Tob 14:13 He treated the ageing parents of his wife with every care and respect, and later buried them in 
Ecbatana in Media. Tobias inherited the patrimony of Raguel besides that of his father Tobit. 

Tob 14:14 Much honoured, he lived to the age of a hundred and seventeen years. 

Tob 14:15 Before he died he witnessed the ruin of Nineveh. He saw the Ninevites taken prisoner and deported 
to Media by Cyaxares king of Media. He blessed God for everything he inflicted on the Ninevites and Assyrians. 
Before his death he had the opportunity of rejoicing over the fate of Nineveh, and he blessed the Lord God for 
ever and ever. Amen. 

Jdt 1 :1 It was the twelfth year of Nebuchadnezzar who reigned over the Assyrians in the great city of Nineveh. 
Arphaxad was then reigning over the Medes in Ecbatana. 

Jdt 1 :2 He surrounded this city with walls of dressed stones three cubits thick and six cubits long, making the 
rampart seventy cubits high and fifty cubits wide. 

Jdt 1 :3 At the gates he placed towers one hundred cubits high and, at the foundations, sixty cubits wide, 

Jdt 1 :4 the gates themselves being seventy cubits high and forty wide to allow his forces to march out in a body 
and his infantry to parade freely. 

Jdt 1 :5 About this time King Nebuchadnezzar gave battle to King Arphaxad in the great plain lying in the territory 
of Ragae. 

Jdt 1:6 Supporting him were all the peoples from the highlands, all from the Euphrates and Tigris and 
Hydaspes, and those from the plains who were subject to Arioch, king of the Elymaeans. Thus many nations had 
mustered to take part in the battle of the Cheleoudites. 

Jdt 1 :7 Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians sent a message to all the inhabitants of Persia, to all the 
inhabitants of the western countries, Cilicia, Damascus, Lebanon, Anti-Lebanon, to all those along the coast, 

Jdt 1 :8 to the peoples of Carmel, Gilead, Upper Galilee, the great plain of Esdraelon, 

Jdt 1 :9 to the people of Samaria and its outlying towns, to those beyond Jordan, as far away as Jerusalem, 
Bethany, Chelous, Kadesh, the river of Egypt, Tahpanhes, Rameses and the whole territory of Goshen, 

Jdt 1:10 beyond Tanis too and Memphis, and to all the inhabitants of Egypt as far as the frontiers of Ethiopia. 

Jdt 1 : 1 1 But the inhabitants of these countries ignored the summons of Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians 
and did not rally to him to make war. They were not afraid of him, since in their view he appeared isolated. 

Hence they sent his ambassadors back with nothing achieved and in disgrace. 

Jdt 1:12 Nebuchadnezzar was furious with all these countries. He swore by his throne and kingdom to take 
revenge on all the territories of Cilicia, Damascus and Syria, of the Moabites and of the Ammonites, of Judaea 
and Egypt as far as the limits of the two seas, and to ravage them with the sword. 

Jdt 1:13 In the seventeenth year, he gave battle with his whole army to King Arphaxad and in this battle 
defeated him. He routed Arphaxad’s entire army and all his cavalry and chariots; 

Jdt 1 : 14 he occupied his towns and advanced on Ecbatana; he seized its towers and plundered its market 
places, reducing its former magnificence to a mockery. 

Jdt 1:15 He later captured Arphaxad in the mountains of Ragae and, thrusting him through with his spears, 



destroyed him once and for all. 

Jdt 1:16 He then retired with his troops and all who had joined forces with him: a vast horde of armed men. 

Then he and his army gave themselves up to carefree feasting for a hundred and twenty days. 

Jdt 2:1 In the eighteenth year, on the twenty-second day of the first month, a rumour ran through the palace that 
Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians was to have his revenge on all the countries, as he had threatened. 

Jdt 2:2 Summoning his general staff and senior officers, he held a secret conference with them, and with his 
own lips pronounced utter destruction on the entire area. 

Jdt 2:3 It was then decreed that everyone should be put to death who had not answered the king’s appeal. 

Jdt 2:4 When the council was over, Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians sent for Holofernes, general-in-chief 
of his armies and subordinate only to himself. He said to him, 

Jdt 2:5 Thus speaks the Great King, lord of the whole world, ‘Go; take men of proven valour, about a hundred 
and twenty thousand foot soldiers and a strong company of horse with twelve thousand cavalrymen; 

Jdt 2:6 then advance against all the western lands, since these people have disregarded my call. 

Jdt 2:7 Bid them have earth and water ready, because in my rage I am about to march on them; the feet of my 
soldiers will cover the whole face of the earth, and I shall plunder it. 

Jdt 2:8 Their wounded will fill the valleys and the torrents, and rivers, blocked with their dead, will overflow. 

Jdt 2:9 I shall lead them captive to the ends of the earth. 

Jdt 2:10 Now go! Begin by conquering this whole region for me. If they surrender to you, hold them for me until 
the time comes to punish them. 

Jdt 2:11 But if they resist, look on no one with clemency, hand them over to slaughter and plunder throughout 
the territory entrusted to you. 

Jdt 2:12 For by my life and by the living power of my kingdom I have spoken. All this I shall do by my power. 

Jdt 2:13 And you, neglect none of your master’s commands, act strictly according to my orders without further 
delay’”. 

Jdt 2:14 Leaving the presence of his sovereign, Holofernes immediately summoned all the marshals, generals 
and officers of the Assyrian army 

Jdt 2:15 and detailed the picked troops as his master had ordered, about a hundred and twenty thousand men 
and a further twelve thousand mounted archers. 

Jdt 2:16 He organised these in the normal battle formation. 

Jdt 2:17 He then secured vast numbers of camels, donkeys and mules to carry the baggage, and innumerable 
sheep, oxen and goats for food supplies. 

Jdt 2:18 Every man received full rations and a generous sum of gold and silver from the king’s purse. 

Jdt 2:19 He then set out for the campaign with his whole army, in advance of King Nebuchadnezzar, to 
overwhelm the whole western region with his chariots, his horsemen and his picked body of foot. 

Jdt 2:20 A motley gathering followed in his rear, as numerous as locusts or the grains of sand on the ground; 
there was no counting their multitude. 

Jdt 2:21 Thus they set out from Nineveh and marched for three days towards the Plain of Bectileth. From 
Bectileth they went on to pitch camp near the mountains that lie to the north of Upper Cilicia. 

Jdt 2:22 From there Holofernes advanced into the highlands with his whole army, infantry, horsemen, chariots. 
Jdt 2:23 He cut his way through Put and Lud, carried away captive all the sons of Rassis and sons of Ishmael 
living on the verge of the desert south of Cheleon, 

Jdt 2:24 marched along the Euphrates, crossed Mesopotamia, rased all the fortified towns controlling the Wadi 
Abron and reached the sea. 

Jdt 2:25 Next he attacked the territories of Cilicia, butchering all who offered him resistance, advanced on the 
southern frontiers of Japheth, facing Arabia, 

Jdt 2:26 completely encircled the Midianites, burned their tents and plundered their sheep-folds, 

Jdt 2:27 made his way down to the Damascus plain at the time of the wheat harvest, set fire to the fields, 
destroyed the flocks and herds, sacked the towns, laid the countryside waste and put all the young men to the 
sword. 

Jdt 2:28 Fear and trembling seized all the coastal peoples; those of Sidon and Tyre, those of Sur, Ocina and 
Jamnia. The populations of Azotos and Ascalon were panic-stricken. 

Jdt 3:1 They therefore sent envoys to him to sue for peace, to say, 

Jdt 3:2 “We are servants of the great King Nebuchadnezzar; we lie prostrate before you. Treat us as you think 
fit. 

Jdt 3:3 Our cattle-farms, all our land, all our wheat fields, our flocks and herds, all the sheep-folds in our 
encampments are at your disposal. Do with them as you please. 

Jdt 3:4 Our towns and their inhabitants too are at your service; go and treat them as you think fit”. 

Jdt 3:5 These men came to Holofernes and delivered the message as above. 

Jdt 3:6 He then made his way down to the coast with his army and stationed garrisons in all the fortified towns, 



levying outstanding men there as auxiliaries. 

Jdt 3:7 The people of these cities and of all the other towns in the neighbourhood welcomed him, wearing 
garlands and dancing to the sound of tambourines. 

Jdt 3:8 But he demolished their shrines and cut down their sacred trees, carrying out his commission to destroy 
all local gods so that the nations should worship Nebuchadnezzar alone and people of every language and 
nationality should hail him as a god. 

Jdt 3:9 Thus he reached the edge of Esdraelon, in the neighbourhood of Dothan, a village facing the great ridge 
of Judaea. 

Jdt 3:10 He pitched camp between Geba and Scythopolis and stayed there a full month to re-provision his 
forces. 

Jdt 4:1 When the Israelites living in Judaea heard how Holofernes, general-in-chief of Nebuchadnezzar king of 
the Assyrians, had treated the various nations, plundering their temples and destroying them, 

Jdt 4:2 they were thoroughly alarmed at his approach and trembled for Jerusalem and the Temple of the Lord 
their God. 

Jdt 4:3 They had returned from captivity only a short time before, and the resettlement of the people in Judaea 
and the reconsecration of the sacred furnishings, of the altar, and of the Temple, which had been profaned, were 
of recent date. 

Jdt 4:4 They therefore alerted the whole of Samaria, Kona, Beth-Horon, Belmain, Jericho, Choba, Aesora and 
the Salem valley. 

Jdt 4:5 They occupied the summits of the highest mountains and fortified the villages on them; they laid in 
supplies for the coming war, as the fields had just been harvested. 

Jdt 4:6 Joakim the high priest, resident in Jerusalem at the time, wrote to the inhabitants of Bethulia and of 
Betomesthaim, two towns facing Esdraelon, towards the plain of Dothan. 

Jdt 4:7 He ordered them to occupy the mountain passes, the only means of access to Judaea, for there it would 
be easy for them to halt an attacking force, the narrowness of the approach not allowing men to advance more 
than two abreast. 

Jdt 4:8 The Israelites carried out the orders of Joakim the high priest and of the people’s Council of Elders in 
session at Jerusalem. 

Jdt 4:9 All the men of Israel cried most fervently to God and humbled themselves before him. 

Jdt 4:10 They, their wives, their children, their cattle, all their resident aliens, hired or slave, wrapped sackcloth 
round their loins. 

Jdt 4:1 1 All the Israelites in Jerusalem, including women and children, lay prostrate in front of the Temple, and 
with ashes on their heads stretched out their hands before the Lord. 

Jdt 4:12 They draped the altar itself in sackcloth and fervently joined together in begging the God of Israel not to 
let their children be carried off, their wives distributed as booty, the towns of their heritage destroyed, the Temple 
profaned and desecrated for the heathen to gloat over. 

Jdt 4:13 The Lord heard them and looked kindly on their distress. The people fasted for many days throughout 
Judaea as well as in Jerusalem before the sanctuary of the Lord Almighty. 

Jdt 4:14 Joakim the high priest and all who stood before the Lord, the Lord’s priests and ministers, wore 
sackcloth round their loins as they offered the perpetual burnt offering and the votive and voluntary offerings of 
the people. 

Jdt 4:15 With ashes on their turbans they earnestly called on the Lord to look kindly on the House of Israel. 

Jdt 5: 1 Holofernes, general-in-chief of the Assyrian army, received the intelligence that the Israelites were 
preparing for war, that they had closed the mountain passes, fortified all the high peaks and laid obstructions in 
the plains. 

Jdt 5:2 Holofernes was furious. He summoned all the princes of Moab, all the generals of Ammon and all the 
satraps of the coastal regions. 

Jdt 5:3 “Men of Canaan”, he said, “tell me: what people is this that occupies the hill-country? What towns does it 
inhabit? How large is its army? What are the sources of its power and strength? Who is the king who rules it and 
commands its army? 

Jdt 5:4 Why have they disdained to wait on me, as all the western peoples have?”. 

Jdt 5:5 Achior, leader of all the Ammonites, replied, “May my lord be pleased to listen to what your servant is 
going to say. I shall give you the facts about these mountain folk whose home lies close to you. You will hear no 
lie from the mouth of your servant. 

Jdt 5:6 These people are descended from the Chaldaeans. 

Jdt 5:7 They once came to live in Mesopotamia, because they did not want to follow the gods of their ancestors 
who lived in Chaldaea. 

Jdt 5:8 They abandoned the way of their ancestors to worship the God of heaven, the God they learnt to 
acknowledge. Banished from the presence of their own gods, they fled to Mesopotamia where they lived for a 



long time. 

Jdt 5:9 When God told them to leave their home and set out for Canaan, they settled there and accumulated 
gold and silver and great herds of cattle. 

Jdt 5:10 Next, famine having overwhelmed the land of Canaan, they went down to Egypt where they stayed till 
they were well nourished. There they became a great multitude, a race beyond counting. 

Jdt 5:1 1 But the king of Egypt turned against them and exploited them by forcing them to make bricks; he 
degraded them, reducing them to slavery. 

Jdt 5:12 They cried to their God, who struck the entire land of Egypt with incurable plagues, and the Egyptians 
expelled them. 

Jdt 5:13 God dried up the Red Sea before them 

Jdt 5:14 and led them forward by way of Sinai and Kadesh-Barnea. Having driven off all the inhabitants of the 
desert, 

Jdt 5:15 they settled in the land of the Amorites and in their strength exterminated the entire population of 
Heshbon. Then, having crossed the Jordan, they took possession of all the hill-country, 

Jdt 5:16 driving out the Canaanites before them and the Perizzites, Jebusites, Shechemites and all the 
Girgashites, and lived there for many years. 

Jdt 5:17 All the while they did not sin before their God, prosperity was theirs, for they have a God who hates 
wickedness. 

Jdt 5:18 But when they turned from the path he had marked out for them some were exterminated in a series of 
battles, others were taken captive to a foreign land. The Temple of their God was rased to the ground and their 
towns were seized by their enemies. 

Jdt 5:19 Then having turned once again to their God, they came back from the places to which they had been 
dispersed and scattered, regained possession of Jerusalem, where they have their Temple, and reoccupied the 
hill-country which had been left deserted. 

Jdt 5:20 So, now, master and lord, if this people has committed any fault, if they have sinned against their God, 
let us first be sure that they really have this reason to fail, then advance and attack them. 

Jdt 5:21 But if their nation is guiltless, my lord would do better to abstain, for fear that their Lord and God should 
protect them. We should then become the laughing-stock of the whole world”. 

Jdt 5:22 When Achior had ended this speech, all the people crowding round the tent began protesting. 
Holofernes’ own senior officers, as well as all the coastal peoples and the Moabites, threatened to tear him limb 
from limb. 

Jdt 5:23 “Why should we be afraid of the Israelites? They are a weak and powerless people, quite unable to 
stand a stiff attack. 

Jdt 5:24 Forward! Advance! Your army, Holofernes our master, will swallow them in one mouthful!”. 

Jdt 6:1 When the uproar of those crowding round the council had subsided, Holofernes, general-in-chief of the 
Assyrian army, reprimanded Achior in front of the whole crowd of foreigners and Ammonites. 

Jdt 6:2 “Achior, who do you think you are, you and the Ephraimite mercenaries, playing the prophet like this with 
us today, and trying to dissuade us from making war on the people of Israel? You claim their God will protect 
them. And who is God if not Nebuchadnezzar? He himself will display his power and wipe them off the face of 
the earth, and their God will certainly not save them. 

Jdt 6:3 But we, his servants, shall destroy them as easily as a single individual. They can never resist the 
strength of our cavalry. 

Jdt 6:4 We shall burn them all. Their mountains will be drunk with their blood and their plains filled with their 
corpses. Far from being able to resist us, every one of them will die; thus says King Nebuchadnezzar, lord of the 
whole world. For he has spoken, and his words will not prove empty. 

Jdt 6:5 As for you, Achior, you Ammonite mercenary, who in a rash moment said these words, you will not see 
my face again until the day when I have taken my revenge on this brood from Egypt. 

Jdt 6:6 And then the swords of my soldiers and the spears of my officers will pierce your sides. You will fall 
among their wounded, the moment I turn on Israel. 

Jdt 6:7 My servants will now take you into the hill-country and leave you near one of the towns in the passes; 

Jdt 6:8 you will not die, until you share their ruin. 

Jdt 6:9 No need to look so sad if you cherish the secret hope that they will not be captured! I have spoken; none 
of my words will prove idle”. 

Jdt 6:10 Holofernes having commanded his tent-orderlies to seize Achior, to take him to Bethulia and to hand 
him over to the Israelites, 

Jdt 6:1 1 the orderlies took him, escorted him out of the camp and across the plain, and then, making for the hill- 
country, reached the springs below Bethulia. 

Jdt 6:12 As soon as the men of the town sighted them, they snatched up their weapons, left the town and made 
for the mountain tops, while all the slingers pelted them with stones to prevent them from coming up. 



Jdt 6:13 However, they managed to take cover at the foot of the slope, where they bound Achior and left him 
lying at the bottom of the mountain and returned to their master. 

Jdt 6:14 The Israelites then came down from their town, stopped by him, unbound him and took him to Bethulia, 
where they brought him before the chief men of the town, 

Jdt 6:15 who at that time were Uzziah son of Micah of the tribe of Simeon, Chabris son of Gothoniel and 
Charmis son of Melchiel. 

Jdt 6:16 These summoned all the elders of the town. The young men and the women also hurried to the 
assembly. Achior was made to stand with all the people surrounding him, and Uzziah questioned him about what 
had happened. 

Jdt 6:17 He answered by telling them what had been said at Holofernes’ council, and what he himself had said 
in the presence of the Assyrian leaders, and how Holofernes had bragged of what he would do to the House of 
Israel. 

Jdt 6:18 At this the people fell to the ground and worshipped God. 

Jdt 6:19 “Lord God of heaven”, they cried, “take notice of their arrogance and have pity on the humiliation of our 
race. Look kindly today on those who are consecrated to you”. 

Jdt 6:20 They then spoke reässuringly to Achior and praised him warmly. 

Jdt 6:21 After the assembly Uzziah took him home and gave a banquet for the elders; all that night they called 
on the God of Israel for help. 

Jdt 7:1 The following day Holofernes issued orders to his whole army and to the whole host of auxiliaries who 
had joined him, to break camp and march on Bethulia, to occupy the mountain passes and so open the 
campaign against the Israelites. 

Jdt 7:2 The troops broke camp that same day. The actual fighting force numbered one hundred and twenty 
thousand infantry and twelve thousand cavalry, not to mention the baggage train with the vast number of men on 
foot concerned with that. 

Jdt 7:3 They penetrated the valley in the neighbourhood of Bethulia, near the spring, and deployed on a wide 
front from Dothan to Balbaim and, in depth, from Bethulia to Cyamon, which faces Esdraelon. 

Jdt 7:4 When the Israelites saw this horde, they were all appalled and said to each other, “Now they will lick the 
whole country clean. Not even the loftiest peaks, the gorges or the hills will be able to stand the weight of them”. 
Jdt 7:5 Each man snatched up his arms; they lit beacons on their towers and spent the whole night on watch. 

Jdt 7:6 On the second day Holofernes deployed his entire cavalry in sight of the Israelites in Bethulia. 

Jdt 7:7 He reconnoitred the slopes leading up to the town, located the water-points, seized them and posted 
pickets over them and returned to the main body. 

Jdt 7:8 The chieftains of the sons of Esau, all the leaders of the Moabites and the generals of the coastal district 
then came to him and said, 

Jdt 7:9 “If our master will be pleased to listen to us, his forces will not sustain a single wound. 

Jdt 7:10 These Israelites do not rely so much on their spears as on the height of the mountains where they live. 
And admittedly it is not at all easy to scale these heights of theirs. 

Jdt 7:1 1 “This being the case, master, avoid engaging them in a pitched battle and then you will not lose a single 
man. 

Jdt 7:12 Stay in camp, keep all your troops there too, while your servants seize the spring which rises at the foot 
of the mountain, 

Jdt 7:13 since that is what provides the population of Bethulia with their water supply. Thirst will then force them 
to surrender their town. Meanwhile, we and our men will climb the nearest mountain tops and form advance 
posts there to prevent anyone from leaving the town. 

Jdt 7:14 Hunger will waste them, with their wives and children, and before the sword can reach them they will 
already be lying in the streets outside their houses. 

Jdt 7:15 And you will make them pay dearly for their defiance and their refusal to meet you peaceably”. 

Jdt 7:16 Their words pleased Holofernes as well as all his officers, and he decided to do as they suggested. 

Jdt 7:17 Accordingly, a troop of Moabites moved forward with a further five thousand Assyrians. They 
penetrated the valley and seized the Israelites’ waterpoints and springs. 

Jdt 7:18 Meanwhile the Edomites and Ammonites went and took up positions in the highlands opposite Dothan, 
sending some of their men to the south-east opposite Egrebel near Chous on the Wadi Mochmur. The rest of the 
Assyrian army took up positions in the plain, covering every inch of the ground; their tents and equipment made 
an immense encampment, so vast were their numbers. 

Jdt 7:19 The Israelites called on the Lord their God, dispirited because the enemy had surrounded them and cut 
all line of retreat. 

Jdt 7:20 For thirty-four days the Assyrian army, infantry, chariots, cavalrymen, had them surrounded. Every 
water-jar the inhabitants of Bethulia had was empty, 

Jdt 7:21 their storage-wells were drying up; on no day could a man drink his fill, since their water was rationed. 



Jdt 7:22 Their little children pined away, the women and young men grew weak with thirst; they collapsed in the 
streets and gateways of the town; they had no strength left. 

Jdt 7:23 Young men, women, children, the whole people thronged clamouring round Uzziah and the chief men 
of the town, shouting in the presence of the assembled elders, 

Jdt 7:24 “May God be judge between you and us! For you have done us great harm, by not suing for peace with 
the Assyrians. 

Jdt 7:25 And now there is no one to help us. God has delivered us into their hands to be prostrated before them 
in thirst and utter helplessness. 

Jdt 7:26 Call them in at once; hand the whole town over to be sacked by Holofernes’ men and all his army. 

Jdt 7:27 After all, we should be much better off as their booty than we are now; no doubt we shall be enslaved, 
but at least we shall be alive and not see our little ones dying before our eyes or our wives and children 
perishing. 

Jdt 7:28 By heaven and earth and by our God, the Lord of our fathers, who is punishing us for our sins and the 
sins of our ancestors, we implore you to take this course now, today”. 

Jdt 7:29 Bitter lamentations rose from the whole assembly, and they all cried loudly to the Lord God. 

Jdt 7:30 Then Uzziah spoke to them, “Take heart, brothers! Let us hold out five days more. By then the Lord our 
God will take pity on us, for he will not desert us altogether. 

Jdt 7:31 At the end of this time, if no help is forthcoming, I shall do as you have said”. 

Jdt 7:32 With that he dismissed the people to their various quarters. The men went to man the walls and towers 
of the town, sending the women and children home. The town was full of despondency. 

Jdt 8:1 Judith was informed at the time of what had happened. She was the daughter of Merari son of Ox, son 
of Joseph, son of Oziel, son of Elkiah, son of Ananias, son of Gideon, son of Raphaim, son of Ahitub, son of 
Elijah, son of Hilkiah, son of Eliab, son of Nathanael, son of Salamiel, son of Sarasadai, son of Israel. 

Jdt 8:2 Her husband Manasseh, of her own tribe and family, had died at the time of the barley harvest. 

Jdt 8:3 He was supervising the men as they bound up the sheaves in the field when he caught sunstroke and 
had to take to his bed. He died in Bethulia, his home town, and was buried with his ancestors in the field that lies 
between Dothan and Balamon. 

Jdt 8:4 As a widow, Judith stayed inside her home for three years and four months. 

Jdt 8:5 She had had an upper room built for herself on the roof. She wore sackcloth next to the skin and 
dressed in widow’s weeds. 

Jdt 8:6 She fasted every day of her widowhood except for the Sabbath eve, the Sabbath itself, the eve of New 
Moon, the feast of New Moon and the joyful festivals of the House of Israel. 

Jdt 8:7 Now she was very beautiful, charming to see. Her husband Manasseh had left her gold and silver, 
menservants and maidservants, herds and land; and she lived among all her possessions 
Jdt 8:8 without anyone finding a word to say against her, so devoutly did she fear God. 

Jdt 8:9 Hearing how the water shortage had demoralised the people and how they had complained bitterly to 
the headman of the town, and being also told what Uzziah had said to them and how he had given them his oath 
to surrender the town to the Assyrians in five days’ time, 

Jdt 8:10 Judith immediately sent the serving-woman who ran her household to summon Chabris and Charmis, 
two elders of the town. 

Jdt 8:1 1 When these came in she said: “Listen to me, leaders of the people of Bethulia. You were wrong to 
speak to the people as you did today and to bind yourself by oath, in defiance of God, to surrender the town to 
our enemies if the Lord did not come to your help within a set number of days. 

Jdt 8:12 Who are you, to put God to the test today, you, of all people, to set yourselves above him? 

Jdt 8:13 You put the Lord Almighty to the test! You do not understand anything, and never will. 

Jdt 8:14 If you cannot sound the depths of the human heart or unravel the arguments of the human mind, how 
can you fathom the God who made all things, or sound his mind or unravel his purposes? No, brothers, do not 
provoke the anger of the Lord our God. 

Jdt 8:15 Although it may not be his will to help us within the next five days, he has the power to protect us for as 
many days as he pleases, just as he has the power to destroy us before our enemies. 

Jdt 8:16 But you have no right to demand guarantees where the designs of the Lord our God are concerned. 

For God is not to be threatened as a human being is, nor is he, like a mere human, to be cajoled. 

Jdt 8:17 Rather, as we wait patiently for him to save, let us plead with him to help us. He will hear our voice if 
such is his good pleasure. 

Jdt 8:18 “And indeed of recent times and still today there is not one tribe of ours, or family, or village, or town 
that has worshipped gods made by human hand, as once was done, 

Jdt 8:19 which was the reason why our ancestors were delivered over to sword and sack, and perished in 
misery at the hands of our enemies. 

Jdt 8:20 We for our part acknowledge no other God but him; and so we may hope he will not look on us 



disdainfully or desert our nation. 

Jdt 8:21 “If indeed they capture us, as you expect, then all Judaea will be captured too, and our holy places 
plundered, and we shall answer with our blood for their profanation. 

Jdt 8:22 The slaughter of our brothers, the captivity of our country, the unpeopling of our heritage, will recoil on 
our own heads among the nations whose slaves we shall become, and our new masters will look down on us as 
an outrage and a disgrace; 

Jdt 8:23 for our surrender will not reinstate us in their favour; no, the Lord our God will make it a thing to be 
ashamed of. 

Jdt 8:24 So now, brothers, let us set an example to our brothers, since their lives depend on us, and the 
sanctuary — Temple and altar — rests on us. 

Jdt 8:25 “All this being so, let us rather give thanks to the Lord our God who, as he tested our ancestors, is now 
testing us. 

Jdt 8:26 Remember how he treated Abraham, all the ordeals of Isaac, all that happened to Jacob in Syrian 
Mesopotamia while he kept the sheep of Laban, his mother’s brother. 

Jdt 8:27 For as these ordeals were intended by him to search their hearts, so now this is not vengeance that 
God is exacting on us, but a warning inflicted by the Lord on those who are near his heart”. 

Jdt 8:28 Uzziah replied, “Everything you have just said comes from an honest heart and no one will contradict a 
word of it. 

Jdt 8:29 Not that today is the first time your wisdom has been displayed; from your earliest years all the people 
have known how shrewd you are and of how sound a heart. 

Jdt 8:30 But, parched with thirst, the people forced us to act as we had promised them and to bind ourselves by 
an inviolable oath. 

Jdt 8:31 You are a devout woman; pray to the Lord, then, to send us a downpour to fill our storage-wells, so that 
our faintness may pass”. 

Jdt 8:32 Judith replied, “Listen to me, I intend to do something, the memory of which will be handed down to the 
children of our race from age to age. 

Jdt 8:33 Tonight you must be at the gate of the town. I shall make my way out with my attendant. Before the 
time fixed by you for surrendering the town to our enemies, the Lord will make use of me to rescue Israel. 

Jdt 8:34 You must not ask what I intend to do; I shall not tell you until I have done it”. 

Jdt 8:35 Uzziah and the chief men said, “Go in peace. May the Lord show you a way to take revenge on our 
enemies”. 

Jdt 8:36 And leaving the upper room they went back to their posts. 

Jdt 9:1 Judith threw herself face to the ground, scattered ashes on her head, undressed as far as the sackcloth 
she was wearing and cried loudly to the Lord. At the same time in Jerusalem the evening incense was being 
offered in the Temple of God. Judith said: 

Jdt 9:2 Lord, God of my ancestor Simeon, you armed him with a sword to take vengeance on the foreigners who 
had undone a virgin’s belt to her shame, laid bare her thigh to her confusion, violated her womb to her 
dishonour, since, though you said, “This must not be”, they did it. 

Jdt 9:3 For this you handed their leaders over to slaughter, and their bed, defiled by their treachery, was itself 
betrayed in blood. You struck the slaves with the chieftains and the chieftains with their retainers. 

Jdt 9:4 You left their wives to be carried off, their daughters to be taken captive, and their spoils to be shared out 
among the sons you loved, who had been so zealous for you, had loathed the stain put on their blood and called 
on you for help. O God, my God, now hear this widow too; 

Jdt 9:5 for you have made the past, and what is happening now, and what will follow. What is, what will be, you 
have planned; what has been, you designed. 

Jdt 9:6 Your purposes stood forward; “See, here we are!”. they said. For all your ways are prepared and your 
judgements delivered with foreknowledge. 

Jdt 9:7 See the Assyrians, with their army abounding glorying in their horses and their riders, exulting in the 
strength of their infantry. Trust as they may in shield and spear, in bow and sling, in you they have not 
recognised the Lord, the breaker of battle-lines; 

Jdt 9:8 yours alone is the title of Lord. Break their violence with your might, in your anger bring down their 
strength. For they plan to profane your holy places, to defile the tabernacle, the resting place of your glorious 
name, and to hack down the horn of your altar. 

Jdt 9:9 Observe their arrogance, send your fury on their heads, give the strength I have in mind to this widow’s 
hand. 

Jdt 9:10 By guile of my lips strike down slave with master, and master with retainer. Break their pride by a 
woman’s hand. 

Jdt 9:1 1 Your strength does not lie in numbers, nor your might in strong men; since you are the God of the 
humble, the help of the oppressed, the support of the weak, the refuge of the forsaken, the Saviour of the 



despairing. 

Jdt 9:12 Please, please, God of my father, God of the heritage of Israel, Master of heaven and earth, Creator of 
the waters, King of your whole creation, hear my prayer. 

Jdt 9:13 Give me a beguiling tongue to wound and kill those who have formed such cruel designs against your 
covenant, against your holy dwelling-place, against Mount Zion, against the house belonging to your sons. 

Jdt 9:14 And demonstrate to every nation, every tribe, that you are the Lord, God of all power, all might, and that 
the race of Israel has no protector but you. 

Jdt 10:1 Thus Judith called on the God of Israel. When she had finished praying, 

Jdt 10:2 she got up from the floor, summoned her maid and went down into the rooms which she used on 
Sabbath days and festivals. 

Jdt 10:3 There she removed the sackcloth she was wearing and taking off her widow’s dress, she washed all 
over, anointed herself plentifully with perfumes, dressed her hair, wrapped a turban round it and put on the robe 
of joy she used to wear when her husband Manasseh was alive. 

Jdt 10:4 She put sandals on her feet, put on her necklaces, bracelets, rings, earrings and all her jewellery, and 
made herself beautiful enough to beguile the eye of any man who saw her. 

Jdt 10:5 Then she handed her maid a skin of wine and a flask of oil, filled a bag with barley girdle-cakes, cakes 
of dried fruit and pure loaves, and wrapping all these provisions up gave them to her as well. 

Jdt 10:6 They then went out, making for the town gate of Bethulia. There they found Uzziah waiting with the two 
elders of the town, Chabris and Charmis. 

Jdt 10:7 When they saw Judith, her face so changed and her clothes so different, they were lost in admiration of 
her beauty. They said to her: 

Jdt 10:8 May the God of our ancestors keep you in his favour! May he crown your designs with success to the 
glory of the children of Israel, to the greater glory of Jerusalem! 

Jdt 10:9 Judith worshipped God, and then she said, “Have the town gate opened for me so that I can go out and 
fulfil all the wishes you expressed to me”. They did as she asked and gave orders to the young men to open the 
gate for her. 

Jdt 10:10 This done, Judith went out accompanied by her maid, while the men of the town watched her all the 
way down the mountain and across the valley, until they lost sight of her. 

Jdt 10:1 1 As the women were making straight through the valley, an advance unit of Assyrians intercepted 
them, 

Jdt 10:12 and, seizing Judith, began to question her. “Which side are you on? Where do you come from? Where 
are you going?”. “I am a daughter of the Hebrews”, she replied, “and I am fleeing from them since they will soon be 
your prey. 

Jdt 10:13 I am on my way to see Holofernes, the general of your army, to give him trustworthy information. I 
shall show him the road to take if he wants to capture all the hill-country without losing one man or one life”. 

Jdt 10:14 As the men listened to what she was saying, they stared in astonishment at the sight of such a 
beautiful woman. 

Jdt 10:15 “It will prove the saving of you”, they said to her, “coming down to see our master of your own accord. 
You had better go to his tent; some of our men will escort you and hand you over to him. 

Jdt 10:16 Once you are in his presence do not be afraid. Tell him what you have just told us and you will be well 
treated”. 

Jdt 10:17 They then detailed a hundred of their men as escort for herself and her attendant, and these led them 
to the tent of Holofernes. 

Jdt 10:18 News of her coming had already spread through the tents, and there was a general stir in the camp. 
She was still outside the tent of Holofernes waiting to be announced, when a crowd began forming round her. 

Jdt 10:19 They were immediately impressed by her beauty and impressed with the Israelites because of her. 
“Who could despise a people who have women like this?”. they kept saying. “Better not leave one of them alive; 
let any go and they could twist the whole world round their fingers!”. 

Jdt 10:20 The bodyguard and adjutants of Holofernes then came out and led Judith into the tent. 

Jdt 10:21 Holofernes was resting on his bed under a canopy of purple and gold studded with emeralds and 
precious stones. 

Jdt 10:22 The men announced her and he came out to the entrance to the tent, with silver torches carried 
before him. 

Jdt 10:23 When Judith confronted the general and his adjutant, the beauty of her face astonished them all. She 
fell on her face and did homage to him, but his servants raised her from the ground. 

Jdt 1 1:1 “Courage, woman”, Holofernes said, “do not be afraid. I have never hurt anyone who chose to serve 
Nebuchadnezzar, king of the whole world. 

Jdt 1 1 :2 Even now, if your nation of mountain dwellers had not insulted me, I would not have raised a spear 
against them. This was their fault, not mine. 



Jdt 1 1 :3 But tell me, why have you fled from them and come to us? … Anyhow, this will prove the saving of 
you. Courage! You will live through this night, and many after. 

Jdt 1 1 :4 No one will hurt you. On the contrary, you will be treated as well as any who serve my lord King 
Nebuchadnezzar”. 

Jdt 1 1 :5 Judith said, “Please listen favourably to what your slave has to say. Permit your servant to speak in 
your presence, I shall speak no word of a lie to my lord tonight. 

Jdt 1 1 :6 You have only to follow your servant’s advice and God will bring your work to a successful conclusion; 
in what my lord undertakes he will not fail. 

Jdt 1 1 :7 Long life to Nebuchadnezzar, king of the whole world, who has sent you to set every living soul to 
rights; may his power endure! Since, thanks to you, he is served not only by human beings, but because of your 
might the wild animals themselves, the cattle, and the birds of the air are to live in the service of 
Nebuchadnezzar and his whole House. 

Jdt 1 1 :8 “We have indeed heard of your genius and adroitness of mind. It is known everywhere in the world that 
throughout the empire you have no rival for ability, wealth of experience and brilliance in waging war. 

Jdt 1 1 :9 We have also heard what Achior said in his speech to your council. The men of Bethulia having spared 
him, he has told them everything that he said to you. 

Jdt 11:10 Now, master and lord, do not disregard what he said; keep it in your mind, since it is true; our nation 
will not be punished, the sword will indeed have no power over them, unless they sin against their God. 

Jdt 11:11 But as it is, my lord need expect no repulse or setback, since death is about to fall on their heads, for 
sin has gained a hold over them, provoking the anger of their God each time that they commit it. 

Jdt 1 1:12 As they are short of food and their water is giving out, they have resolved to fall back on their cattle 
and decided to make use of all the things that God has, by his laws, forbidden them to eat. 

Jdt 11:13 Not only have they made up their minds to eat the first-fruits of corn and the tithes of wine and oil, 
though these have been consecrated by them and set apart for the priests who serve in Jerusalem in the 
presence of our God, and may not lawfully even be handled by ordinary people, 

Jdt 11:14 but they have sent men to Jerusalem — where the inhabitants are doing much the same — to bring 
them back authorisation from the Council of Elders. 

Jdt 1 1:15 Now this will be the outcome: when the permission arrives and they act on it, that very day they will be 
delivered over to you for destruction. 

Jdt 11:16 “When I, your servant, came to know all this, I fled from them. God has sent me to do things with you 
at which the world will be astonished when it hears. 

Jdt 1 1:17 Your servant is a devout woman; she honours the God of heaven day and night. I therefore propose, 
my lord, to stay with you. I, your servant, shall go out every night into the valley and pray to God to let me know 
when they have committed their sin. 

Jdt 11:18 I shall then come and tell you, so that you can march out with your whole army; and none of them will 
be able to resist you. 

Jdt 1 1:19 I shall be your guide right across Judaea until you reach Jerusalem; there I shall enthrone you in the 
very middle of the city. And then you can round them up like shepherd-less sheep, with never a dog daring to 
bark at you. Foreknowledge tells me this; this has been foretold to me and I have been sent to reveal it to you”. 
Jdt 1 1 :20 Her words pleased Holofernes, and all his adjutants. Full of admiration at her wisdom they exclaimed, 
Jdt 1 1 :21 “There is no woman like her from one end of the earth to the other, so lovely of face and so wise of 
speech!”. 

Jdt 1 1 :22 Holofernes said, “God has done well to send you ahead of the others. Strength will be ours, and ruin 
theirs who have insulted my lord. 

Jdt 1 1 :23 As for you, you are as beautiful as you are eloquent; if you do as you have promised, your God shall 
be my God, and you yourself shall make your home in the palace of King Nebuchadnezzar and be famous 
throughout the world”. 

Jdt 12:1 With that he had her brought in to where his silver dinner service was already laid, and had his own 
food served to her and his own wine poured out for her. 

Jdt 12:2 But Judith said, “I would rather not eat this, in case I incur some fault. What I have brought will be 
enough for me”. 

Jdt 12:3 “Suppose your provisions run out”, Holofernes asked, “how could we get more of the same sort? We 
have no one belonging to your race here”. 

Jdt 12:4 “May your soul live, my lord”, Judith answered, “the Lord will have used me to accomplish his plan, 
before your servant has finished these provisions”. 

Jdt 12:5 Holofernes’ adjutants then took her to a tent where she slept until midnight. A little before the morning 
watch, she got up. 

Jdt 12:6 She had already sent this request to Holofernes, “Let my lord kindly give orders for your servant to be 
allowed to go out and pray”, 



Jdt 12:7 and Holofernes had ordered his guards not to prevent her. She stayed in the camp for three days; she 
went out each night to the valley of Bethulia and washed at the spring where the picket had been posted. 

Jdt 12:8 As she went she prayed to the Lord God of Israel to guide her in her plan to relieve the children of her 
people. 

Jdt 12:9 Having purified herself, she would return and stay in her tent until her meal was brought her in the 
evening. 

Jdt 12:10 On the fourth day Holofernes gave a banquet, inviting only his own staff and none of the other officers. 
Jdt 12:11 He said to Bagoas, the officer in charge of his personal affairs, “Go and persuade that Hebrew woman 
you are looking after to come and join us and eat and drink in our company. 

Jdt 12:12 We shall be disgraced if we let a woman like this go without seducing her. If we do not seduce her, 
everyone will laugh at us!”. 

Jdt 12:13 Bagoas then left Holofernes and went to see Judith. “Would this young and lovely woman condescend 
to come to my lord?”. he asked. “She will occupy the seat of honour opposite him, drink the joyful wine with us 
and be treated today like one of the Assyrian ladies who stand in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar”. 

Jdt 12:14 “Who am I”, Judith replied, “to resist my lord? I shall not hesitate to do whatever he wishes, and doing 
this will be my joy to my dying day”. 

Jdt 12:15 So she got up and put on her dress and all her feminine adornments. Her maid preceded her, and on 
the floor in front of Holofernes spread the fleece which Bagoas had given Judith for her daily use to lie on as she 
ate. 

Jdt 12:16 Judith came in and took her place. The heart of Holofernes was ravished at the sight; his very soul 
was stirred. He was seized with a violent desire to sleep with her; and indeed since the first day he saw her, he 
had been waiting for an opportunity to seduce her. 

Jdt 12:17 “Drink then!”. Holofernes said. “Enjoy yourself with us!”. 

Jdt 12:18 “I am delighted to do so, my lord, for since my birth I have never felt my life more worthwhile than 
today”. 

Jdt 12:19 She took what her maid had prepared, and ate and drank facing him. 

Jdt 12:20 Holofernes was so enchanted with her that he drank far more wine than he had drunk on any other 
day in his life. 

Jdt 13:1 It grew late and his staff hurried away. Bagoas closed the tent from the outside, having shown out 
those who still lingered in his lord’s presence. They went to their beds wearied with too much drinking, 

Jdt 13:2 and Judith was left alone in the tent with Holofernes who had collapsed wine-sodden on his bed. 

Jdt 1 3:3 Judith then told her maid to stay just outside the bedroom and wait for her to come out, as she did 
every morning. She had let it be understood she would be going out to her prayers and had also spoken of her 
intention to Bagoas. 

Jdt 13:4 By now everyone had left Holofernes, and no one, either important or unimportant, was left in the 
bedroom. Standing beside the bed, Judith murmured to herself: Lord God, to whom all strength belongs, prosper 
what my hands are now to do for the greater glory of Jerusalem; 

Jdt 13:5 now is the time to recover your heritage and to further my plans to crush the enemies arrayed against 
us. 

Jdt 13:6 With that she went up to the bedpost by Holofernes’ head and took down his scimitar; 

Jdt 1 3:7 coming closer to the bed she caught him by the hair and said, “Make me strong today, Lord God of 
Israel!”. 

Jdt 1 3:8 Twice she struck at his neck with all her might, and cut off his head. 

Jdt 13:9 She then rolled his body off the bed and pulled down the canopy from the bedposts. After which, she 
went out and gave the head of Holofernes to her maid 

Jdt 13:10 who put it in her food bag. The two then left the camp together, as they always did when they went to 
pray. Once they were out of the camp, they skirted the ravine, climbed the slope to Bethulia and made for the 
gates. 

Jdt 13:1 1 From a distance, Judith shouted to the guards on the gates, “Open the gate! Open! For the Lord our 
God is with us still, displaying his strength in Israel and his might against our enemies, as he has done today!”. 

Jdt 13:12 Hearing her voice, the townsmen hurried down to the town gate and summoned the elders. 

Jdt 13:13 Everyone, great and small, came running down, since her arrival was unexpected. They threw the 
gate open, welcomed the women, lit a fire to see by and crowded round them. 

Jdt 13:14 Then Judith raised her voice and said, “Praise God! Praise him! Praise the God who has not 
withdrawn his mercy from the House of Israel, but has shattered our enemies by my hand tonight!”. 

Jdt 13:15 She pulled the head out of the bag and held it for them to see. “This is the head of Holofernes, 
general-in-chief of the Assyrian army; here is the canopy under which he lay drunk! The Lord has struck him 
down by the hand of a woman! 

Jdt 13:16 Glory to the Lord who has protected me in the course I took! My face seduced him, only to his own 



undoing; he committed no sin with me to shame me or disgrace me”. 

Jdt 13:17 Overcome with emotion, the people all prostrated themselves and worshipped God, exclaiming with 
one voice, “Blessings on you, our God, for confounding your people’s enemies today!”. 

Jdt 13:18 Uzziah then said to Judith: May you be blessed, my daughter, by God Most High, beyond all women 
on earth; and blessed be the Lord God, Creator of heaven and earth, who guided you to cut off the head of the 
leader of our enemies! 

Jdt 13:19 The trust which you have shown will not pass from human hearts, as they commemorate the power of 
God for evermore. 

Jdt 13:20 God grant you may be always held in honour and rewarded with blessings, since you did not consider 
your own life when our nation was brought to its knees, but warded off our ruin, walking in the right path before 
our God. And the people all said, “Amen! Amen!”. 

Jdt 14:1 Judith said, “Listen to me, brothers. Take this head and hang it on your battlements. 

Jdt 14:2 When morning comes and the sun is up, let every man take his arms and every able-bodied man leave 
the town. Appoint a leader for them, as if you meant to march down to the plain against the Assyrian advanced 
post. But you must not do this. 

Jdt 14:3 The Assyrians will gather up their equipment, make for their camp and wake up their commanders; they 
in turn will rush to the tent of Holofernes and not be able to find him. They will then be seized with panic and flee 
at your advance. 

Jdt 14:4 All you and the others who live in the territory of Israel will have to do is to give chase and slaughter 
them as they retreat. 

Jdt 14:5 “But before you do this, call me Achior the Ammonite, for him to see and identify the man who held the 
House of Israel in contempt, the man who sent him to us as someöne already doomed to die”. 

Jdt 14:6 So they had Achior brought from Uzziah’s house. No sooner had he arrived and seen the head of 
Holofernes held by a member of the people’s assembly than he fell on his face in a faint. 

Jdt 14:7 They lifted him up. He then threw himself at Judith’s feet and, prostrate before her, exclaimed: May you 
be blessed in all the tents of Judah and in every nation; those who hear your name will be seized with dread! 

Jdt 14:8 “Now tell me everything that you have done in these past few days”. And surrounded by the people, 
Judith told him everything she had done from the day she left Bethulia to the moment when she was speaking. 
Jdt 14:9 When she came to the end, the people cheered at the top of their voices until the town echoed. 

Jdt 14:10 Achior, recognising all that the God of Israel had done, believed ardently in him and, accepting 
circumcision, was permanently incorporated into the House of Israel. 

Jdt 14:1 1 At daybreak they hung the head of Holofernes on the ramparts. Every man took his arms and they all 
went out in groups to the slopes of the mountain. 

Jdt 14:12 Seeing this, the Assyrians sent word to their leaders, who in turn reported to the generals, the 
captains of thousands and all the other officers; 

Jdt 14:13 and these in their turn reported to the tent of Holofernes. “Rouse our master”, they said to his major- 
domo, “these slaves have dared to march down on us to attack - and to be wiped out to a man!”. 

Jdt 14:14 Bagoas went inside and struck the curtain dividing the tent, thinking that Holofernes was sleeping with 
Judith. 

Jdt 14:15 But as no one seemed to hear, he drew the curtain and went into the bedroom, to find him thrown 
down dead on the threshold, with his head cut off. 

Jdt 14:16 He gave a great shout, wept, sobbed, shrieked and rent his clothes. 

Jdt 14:17 He then went into the tent which Judith had occupied and could not find her either. Then, rushing out 
to the men, he shouted, 

Jdt 14:18 “The slaves have rebelled! A single Hebrew woman has brought shame on the House of 
Nebuchadnezzar. Holofernes is lying dead on the ground, without his head!”. 

Jdt 14:19 When they heard this, the leaders of the Assyrian army tore their tunics in consternation, and the 
camp rang with their wild cries and their shouting. 

Jdt 15:1 When the men who were still in their tents heard the news they were appalled. 

Jdt 15:2 Panic-stricken and trembling, no two of them could keep together, the rout was complete, with one 
accord they fled along every track across the plain or through the mountains. 

Jdt 15:3 The men who had been bivouacking in the mountains round Bethulia were fleeing too. Then all the 
Israelite warriors charged down on them. 

Jdt 15:4 Uzziah sent messengers to Betomasthaim, Bebai, Choba, Kola, throughout the whole territory of Israel, 
to inform them of what had happened and to urge them all to hurl themselves on the enemy and annihilate them. 
Jdt 15:5 As soon as the Israelites heard the news, they fell on them as one man and massacred them all the 
way to Choba. The men of Jerusalem and the entire mountain country also rallied to them, once they had been 
informed of the events in the enemy camp. Then the men of Gilead and Galilee attacked them on the flank and 
struck at them fiercely till they neared Damascus and its territory. 



Jdt 15:6 All the other inhabitants of Bethulia fell on the Assyrian camp and looted it to their great profit. 

Jdt 15:7 The Israelites returning from the slaughter seized what was left. The hamlets and villages of the 
mountain country and the plain also captured a great deal of booty, since there were vast stores of it. 

Jdt 15:8 Joakim the high priest and the entire Council of Elders of Israel, who were in Jerusalem, came to gaze 
on the benefits that the Lord had lavished on Israel and to see Judith and congratulate her. 

Jdt 15:9 On coming to her house, they blessed her with one accord, saying: You are the glory of Jerusalem! 

You are the great pride of Israel! You are the highest honour of our race! 

Jdt 15:10 By doing all this with your own hand you have deserved well of Israel, and God has approved what 
you have done. May you be blessed by the Lord Almighty in all the days to come! And the people all said, 

“Amen!”. 

Jdt 15:1 1 The people looted the camp for thirty days. They gave Judith the tent of Holofernes, all his silver plate, 
his divans, his drinking bowls and all his furniture. She took this, loaded her mule, harnessed her carts and 
heaped the things into them. 

Jdt 15:12 All the women of Israel, hurrying to see her, formed choirs of dancers in her honour. Judith took 
wands of vine-leaves in her hand and distributed them to the women who accompanied her; 

Jdt 15:13 she and her companions put on wreaths of olive. Then she took her place at the head of the 
procession and led the women as they danced. All the men of Israel, armed and garlanded, followed them, 
singing hymns. 

Jdt 15:14 With all Israel round her, Judith broke into this song of thanksgiving and the whole people sang this 
hymn: 

Jdt 16:1 Break into song for my God, to the tambourine, sing in honour of the Lord, to the cymbal, let psalm and 
canticle mingle for him, extol his name, invoke it! 

Jdt 16:2 For the Lord is a God who breaks battle-lines; he has pitched his camp in the middle of his people to 
deliver me from the hands of my oppressors. 

Jdt 16:3 Assyria came down from the mountains of the north, came with tens of thousands of his army. Their 
multitude blocked the ravines, their horses covered the hills. 

Jdt 16:4 He threatened to burn up my country, destroy my young men with the sword, dash my sucklings to the 
ground, make prey of my little ones, carry off my maidens; 

Jdt 16:5 but the Lord Almighty has thwarted them by a woman’s hand. 

Jdt 16:6 For their hero did not fall at the young men’s hands, it was not the sons of Titans struck him down, no 
proud giants made that attack, but Judith, the daughter of Merari, who disarmed him with the beauty of her face. 
Jdt 16:7 She laid aside her widow’s dress to raise up those who were oppressed in Israel; she anointed her face 
with perfume, 

Jdt 16:8 bound her hair under a turban, put on a linen gown to seduce him. 

Jdt 16:9 Her sandal ravished his eye, her beauty took his soul prisoner and the scimitar cut through his neck! 

Jdt 16:10 The Persians trembled at her boldness, the Medes were daunted by her daring. 

Jdt 16:1 1 These were struck with fear when my lowly ones raised the war cry, these were seized with terror 
when my weak ones shouted, and when they raised their voices these gave ground. 

Jdt 16:12 The children of mere girls ran them through, pierced them like the offspring of deserters. They 
perished in the battle of my Lord! 

Jdt 16:13 I shall sing a new song to my God. Lord, you are great, you are glorious, wonderfully strong, 
unconquerable. 

Jdt 16:14 May your whole creation serve you! For you spoke and things came into being, you sent your breath 
and they were put together, and no one can resist your voice. 

Jdt 16:15 Should mountains be tossed from their foundations to mingle with the waves, should rocks melt like 
wax before your face, to those who fear you, you would still be merciful. 

Jdt 16:16 A little thing indeed is a sweetly smelling sacrifice, still less the fat burned for you in burnt offering; but 
whoëver fears the Lord is great for ever. 

Jdt 16:17 Woe to the nations who rise against my race! The Lord Almighty will punish them on judgement day. 
He will send fire and worms in their flesh and they will weep with pain for evermore. 

Jdt 16:18 When they reached Jerusalem they fell on their faces before God and, once the people had been 
purified, they presented their burnt offerings, voluntary offerings and gifts. 

Jdt 16:19 All Holofernes’ property given her by the people, and the canopy she herself had stripped from his 
bed, Judith vowed to God as a dedicated offering. 

Jdt 16:20 For three months the people gave themselves up to rejoicings in front of the Temple in Jerusalem, 
where Judith stayed with them. 

Jdt 16:21 When this was over, everyone returned home. Judith went back to Bethulia and lived on her property; 
as long as she lived, she enjoyed a great reputation throughout the country. 

Jdt 16:22 She had many suitors, but all her days, from the time her husband Manasseh died and was gathered 



to his people, she never gave herself to another man. 

Jdt 16:23 Her fame spread more and more, the older she grew in her husband’s house; she lived to the age of 
one hundred and five. She emancipated her maid, then died in Bethulia and was buried in the cave where 
Manasseh her husband lay. 

Jdt 16:24 The House of Israel mourned her for seven days. Before her death she had distributed her property 
among her own relations and those of her husband Manasseh. 

Jdt 16:25 Never again during the lifetime of Judith, nor indeed for a long time after her death, did anyone trouble 
the Israelites. 

Est 1:1 It was in the days of Ahasuerus, the Ahasuerus whose empire stretched from India to Ethiopia and 
comprised one hundred and twenty-seven provinces, (a) In the second year of the reign of the Great King, 
Ahasuerus, on the first day of Nisan, a dream came to Mordecai son of Jair, son of Shimei, son of Kish, of the 
tribe of Benjamin, (b) a Jew living at Susa and holding high office at the royal court, (c) He was one of the 
captives whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had deported from Jerusalem with Jeconiah king of Judah, (d) 
This was his dream. There were cries and noise, thunder and earthquakes, and disorder over the whole earth. 

(e) Then two great dragons came forward, each ready for the fray, and set up a great roar, (f) At the sound of 
them every nation made ready to wage war against the nation of the just, (g) A day of darkness and gloom, of 
affliction and distress, oppression and great disturbance on earth! (h) The entire upright nation was thrown into 
consternation at the fear of the evils awaiting it and prepared for death, crying out to God. (i) Then from its cry, 
as from a little spring, there grew a great river, a flood of water, (j) Light came as the sun rose, and the humble 
were raised up and devoured the mighty, (k) On awakening from this dream and vision of God’s designs, 
Mordecai thought deeply about the matter, trying his best all day to discover what its meaning might be. (I) 
Mordecai was lodging at court with Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs who guarded the palace, (m) 
Having got wind of their plotting and gained knowledge of their designs, he discovered that they were preparing 
to assassinate King Ahasuerus, and he warned the king against them, (n) The king gave orders for the two 
officers to be tortured; they confessed and were executed, (o) He then had these events entered in his Record 
Book, while Mordecai himself also wrote an account of them, (p) The king then appointed Mordecai to an office 
at court and rewarded him with presents, (q) But Haman son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, who enjoyed high 
favour with the king, determined to injure Mordecai in revenge for the affair of the king’s two officers. 

Est 1 :2 In those days, when King Ahasuerus was sitting on his royal throne in the citadel of Susa, 

Est 1 :3 in the third year of his reign, he gave a banquet at his court for all his officers-of-state and ministers, 
Persian and Median army-commanders, nobles and provincial governors. 

Est 1 :4 Thus he displayed the riches and splendour of his empire and the pomp and glory of his majesty; the 
festivities went on for a long time, a hundred and eighty days. 

Est 1 :5 When this period was over, for seven days the king gave a banquet for all the people living in the citadel 
of Susa, to high and low alike, on the esplanade in the gardens of the royal palace. 

Est 1 :6 There were white and violet hangings fastened with cords of fine linen and purple thread to silver rings 
on marble columns, couches of gold and silver on a pavement of porphyry, marble, mother-of-pearl and precious 
stones. 

Est 1 :7 For drinking there were golden cups of various design and plenty of wine provided by the king with royal 
liberality. 

Est 1 :8 The royal edict did not, however, make drinking obligatory, the king having instructed the officials of his 
household to treat each guest according to the guest’s own wishes. 

Est 1 :9 Queen Vashti, for her part, gave a banquet for the women in the royal palace of King Ahasuerus. 

Est 1:10 On the seventh day, when the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, 
Bigtha, Abagtha, Zethar and Carkas, the seven officers in attendance on the person of King Ahasuerus, 

Est 1:11 to bring Queen Vashti before the king, crowned with her royal diadem, in order to display her beauty to 
the people and the officers-of-state, since she was very beautiful. 

Est 1:12 But Queen Vashti refused to come at the king’s command delivered by the officers. The king was very 
angry at this and his rage grew hot. 

Est 1:13 Addressing himself to the wise men who were versed in the law — it being the practice to refer matters 
affecting the king to expert lawyers and jurists- 

Est 1:14 he summoned Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena and Memucan, seven Persian 
and Median officers-of-state who had privileged access to the royal presence and occupied the leading positions 
in the kingdom. 

Est 1:15 “According to law”, he said, “what is to be done to Queen Vashti for not obeying the command of King 
Ahasuerus delivered by the officers?”. 

Est 1:16 In the presence of the king and the officers-of-state, Memucan replied, “Queen Vashti has wronged not 
only the king but also all the officers-of-state and all the peoples inhabiting the provinces of King Ahasuerus. 

Est 1:17 The queen’s conduct will soon become known to all the women, who will adopt a contemptuous 



attitude towards their own husbands. They will say, ‘King Ahasuerus himself commanded Queen Vashti to 
appear before him and she did not come’. 

Est 1:18 Before the day is out, the wives of the Persian and Median office rs-of-state will be telling every one of 
the king’s office rs-of-state what they have heard about the queen’s behaviour; and that will mean contempt and 
anger all round. 

Est 1:19 If it is the king’s pleasure, let him issue a royal edict, to be irrevocably incorporated into the laws of the 
Persians and Medes, to the effect that Vashti is never to appear again before King Ahasuerus, and let the king 
confer her royal dignity on a worthier woman. 

Est 1 :20 Let this edict issued by the king be proclaimed throughout his empire — which is great — and all the 
women will henceforth bow to the authority of their husbands, both high and low alike”. 

Est 1 :21 This speech pleased the king and the office rs-of-state, and the king did as Memucan advised. 

Est 1 :22 He sent letters to all the provinces of the kingdom, to each province in its own script and to each nation 
in its own language, ensuring that every husband should be master in his own house. 

Est 2:1 Some time after this, when the king’s wrath had subsided, Ahasuerus remembered Vashti, how she had 
behaved, and the measures taken against her. 

Est 2:2 The king’s gentlemen-in-waiting said, “A search should be made on the king’s behalf for beautiful young 
virgins, 

Est 2:3 and the king appoint commissioners throughout the provinces of his realm to bring all these beautiful 
young virgins to the citadel of Susa, to the harem under the authority of Hegai the king’s eunuch, custodian of 
the women. Here he will give them whatever they need for enhancing their beauty, 

Est 2:4 and the girl who pleases the king can take Vashti’s place as queen. 1 This advice pleased the king and he 
acted on it. 

Est 2:5 Now in the citadel of Susa there lived a Jew called Mordecai son of Jair, son of Shimei, son of Kish, of 
the tribe of Benjamin, 

Est 2:6 who had been deported from Jerusalem among the captives taken away with Jeconiah king of Judah by 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, 

Est 2:7 and was now bringing up a certain Hadassah, otherwise called Esther, his uncle’s daughter, who had 
lost both father and mother; the girl had a good figure and a beautiful face, and on the death of her parents 
Mordecai had adopted her as his daughter. 

Est 2:8 On the promulgation of the royal command and edict a great number of girls were brought to the citadel 
of Susa where they were entrusted to Hegai. Esther, too, was taken to the king’s palace and entrusted to Hegai, 
the custodian of the women. 

Est 2:9 The girl pleased him and won his favour. Not only did he quickly provide her with all she needed for her 
dressing room and her meals, but he gave her seven special maids from the king’s household and transferred 
her and her maids to the best part of the harem. 

Est 2:10 Esther had not divulged her race or parentage, since Mordecai had forbidden her to do so. 

Est 2:1 1 Mordecai walked up and down in front of the courtyard of the harem all day and every day, to learn 
how Esther was and how she was being treated. 

Est 2:12 Each girl had to appear in turn before King Ahasuerus after a delay of twelve months fixed by the 
regulations for the women; this preparatory period was occupied as follows: six months with oil of myrrh, and six 
months with spices and lotions commonly used for feminine beauty treatment. 

Est 2:13 When each girl went to the king, she was given whatever she wanted to take with her, since she then 
moved from the harem into the royal household. 

Est 2:14 She went there in the evening, and the following morning returned to another harem entrusted to the 
care of Shaashgaz, the king’s officer, custodian of the concubines. She did not go to the king any more, unless 
he was particularly pleased with her and had her summoned by name. 

Est 2:15 But when it was the turn of Esther the daughter of Abihail, whose nephew Mordecai had adopted her 
as his own daughter, to go into the king’s presence, she did not ask for anything beyond what had been 
assigned her by Hegai, the king’s officer, custodian of the women. Esther won the approval of all who saw her. 
Est 2:16 She was brought to King Ahasuerus in his royal apartments in the tenth month, which is called Tebeth, 
in the seventh year of his reign; 

Est 2:17 and the king liked Esther better than any of the other women; none of the other girls found so much 
favour and approval with him. So he set the royal diadem on her head and proclaimed her queen instead of 
Vashti. 

Est 2:18 The king then gave a great banquet, Esther’s banquet, for all his officers-of-state and ministers, 
decreed a holiday for all the provinces and distributed largesse with royal prodigality. 

Est 2:19 When Esther, like the other girls, had been transferred to the second harem, 

Est 2:20 she did not divulge her parentage or race, in obedience to the orders of Mordecai, whose instructions 
she continued to follow as when she had been under his care. 



Est 2:21 At this time Mordecai was attached to the Chancellery and two malcontents, Bigthan and Teresh, 
officers in the king’s service as Guards of the Threshold, plotted to assassinate King Ahasuerus. 

Est 2:22 Mordecai came to hear of this and informed Queen Esther, who in turn, on Mordecai’s authority, told 
the king. 

Est 2:23 The matter was investigated and proved to be true. The two conspirators were sent to the gallows, and 
the incident was recorded in the Annals, in the royal presence. 

Est 3:1 Shortly afterwards, King Ahasuerus singled out Haman son of Hammedatha, a native of Agag, for 
promotion. He raised him in rank, granting him precedence over all his colleagues, the other officers-of-state, 

Est 3:2 and all the royal officials employed at the Chancellery used to bow low and prostrate themselves 
whenever Haman appeared — such was the king’s command. Mordecai refused either to bow or to prostrate 
himself. 

Est 3:3 “Why do you flout the royal command?”. the officials of the Chancellery asked Mordecai. 

Est 3:4 Day after day they asked him this, but he took no notice of them. In the end they reported the matter to 
Haman, to see whether Mordecai would persist in his attitude, since he had told them that he was a Jew. 

Est 3:5 Haman could see for himself that Mordecai did not bow or prostrate himself in his presence; he became 
furiously angry. 

Est 3:6 And, on being told what race Mordecai belonged to, he thought it beneath him merely to get rid of 
Mordecai, but made up his mind to wipe out all the members of Mordecai’s race, the Jews, living in Ahasuerus’ 
entire empire. 

Est 3:7 In the first month, that is the month of Nisan, of the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus, the pur (that is, the 
lot) was cast in Haman’s presence, to determine the day and the month. The lot falling on the twelfth month, 
which is Adar, 

Est 3:8 Haman said to King Ahasuerus, “There is a certain unassimilated nation scattered among the other 
nations throughout the provinces of your realm; their laws are different from those of all the other nations, and 
the royal laws they ignore; hence it is not in the king’s interests to tolerate them. 

Est 3:9 If their destruction be signed, so please the king, I am ready to pay ten thousand talents of silver to the 
king’s receivers, to be credited to the royal treasury”. 

Est 3:10 The king then took his signet ring off his hand and gave it to Haman son of Hammedatha, the 
persecutor of the Jews. 

Est 3:1 1 “Keep the money”, he said, “and you can have the people too; do what you like with them”. 

Est 3:12 The royal scribes were therefore summoned for the thirteenth day of the first month, when they wrote 
out the orders addressed by Haman to the king’s satraps, to the governors ruling each province and to the 
principal officials of each people, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language. The 
edict was signed in the name of King Ahasuerus and sealed with his ring, 

Est 3:13 and letters were sent by runners to every province of the realm, ordering the destruction, slaughter and 
annihilation of all Jews, young and old, including women and children, on the same day — the thirteenth day of 
the twelfth month, which is Adar — and the seizing of their possessions, (a) The text of the letter was as follows: 
“The Great King, Ahasuerus, to the governors of the hundred and twenty-seven provinces stretching from India 
to Ethiopia, and to their subordinate district commissioners: (b) “Being placed in authority over many nations and 
ruling the whole world, I have resolved never to be carried away by the insolence of power, but always to rule 
with moderation and clemency, so as to assure for my subjects a life ever free from storms and, offering my 
kingdom the benefits of civilisation and free transit from end to end, to restore that peace which all men desire. 

(c) In consultation with our advisers as to how this aim is to be effected, we have been informed by one of them, 
eminent among us for prudence and well proved for his unfailing devotion and unshakeable trustworthiness, and 
in rank second only to our majesty, Haman by name, (d) that there is, mingled among all the tribes of the earth, a 
certain ill-disposed people, opposed by its laws to every other nation and continually defying the royal 
ordinances, in such a way as to obstruct that form of government assured by us to the general good, (e) 
“Considering therefore that this people, unique of its kind, is in complete opposition to all humanity from which it 
differs by its outlandish laws, that it is hostile to our interests and that it commits the most heinous crimes, to the 
point of endangering the stability of the realm: (f) “We command that those persons designated to you in the 
letters written by Haman, who was appointed to watch over our interests and is a second father to us, be all 
destroyed, root and branch, including women and children, by the swords of their enemies, without any pity or 
mercy, on the fourteenth day of the twelfth month, Adar, of the present year, (g) so that, these past and present 
malcontents being in one day forcibly thrown down to Hades, our government may henceforward enjoy perpetual 
stability and peace”. 

Est 3:14 Copies of this decree, to be promulgated as law in each province, were published to the various 
peoples, so that each might be ready for the day aforementioned. 

Est 3:15 At the king’s command, the runners set out with all speed; the decree was first promulgated in the 
citadel of Susa. While the king and Haman gave themselves up to feasting and drinking, consternation reigned in 



the city of Susa. 

Est 4:1 When Mordecai learned what had happened, he tore his garments and put on sackcloth and ashes. 

Then he walked into the centre of the city, wailing loudly and bitterly, 

Est 4:2 until he arrived in front of the Chancellery, which no one clothed in sackcloth was allowed to enter. 

Est 4:3 And in every province, no sooner had the royal command and edict arrived, than among the Jews there 
was great mourning, fasting, weeping and wailing, and many lay on sackcloth and ashes. 

Est 4:4 When Queen Esther’s maids and officers came and told her, she was overcome with grief. She sent 
clothes for Mordecai to put on instead of his sackcloth, but he refused them. 

Est 4:5 Esther then summoned Hathach, an officer whom the king had appointed to wait on her, and ordered 
him to go to Mordecai and enquire what the matter was and why he was acting in this way. 

Est 4:6 Hathach went out to Mordecai in the city square in front of the Chancellery, 

Est 4:7 and Mordecai told him what had happened to him personally, and also about the sum of money which 
Haman had offered to pay into the royal treasury to procure the destruction of the Jews. 

Est 4:8 He also gave him a copy of the edict of extermination published in Susa for him to show Esther for her 
information, with the message that she was to go to the king and implore his favour and plead with him for the 
race to which she belonged, (a) “Remember your humbler circumstances”, he said, “when you were fed by my 
hand. Since Haman, the second person in the realm, has petitioned the king for our deaths, (b) invoke the Lord, 
speak to the king for us and save us from death!”. 

Est 4:9 Hathach came back and told Esther what Mordecai had said; 

Est 4:10 and she replied with the following message for Mordecai, 

Est 4:11 “Royal officials and people living in the provinces alike all know that for anyone, man or woman, who 
approaches the king in the private apartments without having been summoned there, there is only one law: he 
must die, unless the king, by pointing his golden sceptre towards him, grants him his life. And I have not been 
summoned to the king for the last thirty days”. 

Est 4:12 These words of Esther were reported to Mordecai, 

Est 4:13 who sent back the following reply, “Do not suppose that, because you are in the king’s palace, you are 
going to be the one Jew to escape. 

Est 4:14 No; if you persist in remaining silent at such a time, relief and deliverance will come to the Jews from 
another quarter, but both you and your father’s whole family will perish. Who knows? Perhaps you have come to 
the throne for just such a time as this”. 

Est 4:15 Whereupon Esther sent this reply to Mordecai, 

Est 4:16 “Go and assemble all the Jews now in Susa and fast for me. Do not eat or drink day or night for three 
days. For my part, I and my waiting-women shall keep the same fast, after which I shall go to the king in spite of 
the law; and if I perish, I perish”. 

Est 4:17 Mordecai went away and carried out Esther’s instructions, (a) Then calling to mind all the wonderful 
works of the Lord, he offered this prayer: (b) Lord, Lord, Almighty King, everything is subject to your power, and 
there is no one who can withstand you in your determination to save Israel, (c) You have made heaven and 
earth, and all the marvels that are under heaven. You are the Master of the universe and no one can resist you, 
Lord, (d) You know all things, you, Lord, know that neither pride, self-esteem nor vainglory prompted me to do 
what I have done: to refuse to prostrate myself before proud Haman. Gladly would I have kissed the soles of his 
feet, had this assured the safety of Israel, (e) But what I have done, I have done, rather than place the glory of a 
man above the glory of God; and I shall not prostrate myself to anyone except, Lord, to you, and, in so doing, I 
shall not be acting in pride, (f) And now, Lord God, King, God of Abraham spare your people! For our ruin is 
being plotted, there are plans to destroy your ancient heritage, (g) Do not overlook your inheritance, which you 
redeemed from Egypt to be yours, (h) Hear my supplication, have mercy on your heritage, and turn our grief into 
rejoicing, so that we may live, Lord, to hymn your name. Do not suffer the mouths of those who praise you to 
perish, (i) And all Israel cried out with all their might, since death was staring them in the face, (k) Queen Esther 
also took refuge with the Lord in the mortal peril which had overtaken her. She took off her sumptuous robes and 
put on sorrowful mourning. Instead of expensive perfumes, she covered her head with ashes and dung. She 
mortified her body severely, and the former scenes of her happiness and elegance were now littered with tresses 
torn from her hair. She besought the Lord God of Israel in these words: (I) My Lord, our King, the Only One, 
come to my help, for I am alone and have no helper but you and am about to take my life in my hands, (m) I 
have been taught from infancy in the bosom of my family that you, Lord, have chosen Israel out of all the nations 
and our ancestors out of all before them, to be your heritage for ever; and that you have treated them as you 
promised, (n) But we have sinned against you and you have handed us over to our enemies for paying honour to 
their gods. Lord, you are upright, (o) But they are not satisfied with the bitterness of our slavery: they have 
pledged themselves to their idols to abolish the decree that your own lips have uttered, to blot out your heritage, 
to stop the mouths of those who praise you, to quench your altar and the glory of your House, (p) and instead to 
open the mouths of the heathen, to sing the praise of worthless idols and for ever to idolise a king of flesh, (q) Do 



not yield your sceptre, Lord, to what does not exist. Never let our ruin be matter for laughter. Turn these plots 
against their authors, and make an example of the man who leads the attack on us. (r) Remember, Lord; reveal 
yourself in the time of our distress. As for me, give me courage, King of gods and Master of all powers! (s) Put 
persuasive words into my mouth when I face the lion; change his feeling into hatred for our enemy, so that he 
may meet his end, and all those like him! (t) As for ourselves, save us by your hand, and come to my help, for I 
am alone and have no one but you, Lord, (u) You have knowledge of all things, and you know that I hate 
honours from the godless, that I loathe the bed of the uncircumcised, of any foreigner whatever, (w) You know I 
am under constraint, that I loathe the symbol of my high position bound round my brow when I appear at court; I 
loathe it as if it were a filthy rag and do not wear it on my days of leisure, (x) Your servant has not eaten at 
Haman’s table, nor taken pleasure in the royal banquets, nor drunk the wine of libations, (y) Nor has your 
servant found pleasure from the day of her promotion until now except in you, Lord, God of Abraham, (z) O God, 
whose strength prevails over all, listen to the voice of the desperate, save us from the hand of the wicked, and 
free me from my fear! 

Est 5:1 (a) On the third day, when she had finished praying, she took off her suppliant’s mourning attire and 
dressed herself in her full splendour. Radiant as she then appeared, she invoked God who watches over all 
people and saves them. With her, she took two ladies-in-waiting. With a delicate air she leaned on one, while the 
other accompanied her carrying her train, (b) Rosy with the full flush of her beauty, her face radiated joy and 
love: but her heart shrank with fear, (c) Having passed through door after door, she found herself in the presence 
of the king. He was sitting on his royal throne, dressed in all his robes of state, glittering with gold and precious 
stones — a formidable sight, (d) He looked up, afire with majesty and, blazing with anger, saw her. The queen 
sank to the floor. As she fainted, the colour drained from her face and her head fell against the lady-in-waiting 
beside her. (e) But God changed the king’s heart, inducing a milder spirit. He sprang from his throne in alarm 
and took her in his arms until she recovered, comforting her with soothing words, (f) “What is the matter, Esther?”. 
he said. “I am your brother. Take heart, you are not going to die; our order applies only to ordinary people. Come 
to me”. (g) And raising his golden sceptre he laid it on Esther’s neck, embraced her and said, “Speak to me”. 

Est 5:2 (a) “Sire”, she said, “to me you looked like one of God’s angels, and my heart was moved with fear of 
your majesty. For you are a figure of wonder, my lord, and your face is full of graciousness”. (b) But as she spoke 
she fell down in a faint. The king grew more agitated, and his courtiers all set about reviving her. 

Est 5:3 “What is the matter, Queen Esther?”. the king said. “Tell me what you want; even if it is half my kingdom, I 
grant it you”. 

Est 5:4 “Would it please the king”, Esther replied, “to come with Haman today to the banquet I have prepared for 
him?”. 

Est 5:5 The king said, “Tell Haman to come at once, so that Esther may have her wish”. 

Est 5:6 So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared and, during the banquet, the king 
again said to Esther, “Tell me your request; I grant it to you. Tell me what you want; even if it is half my kingdom, 
it is yours for the asking”. 

Est 5:7 “What do I want, what is my request?”. Esther replied. 

Est 5:8 “If I have found favour in the king’s eyes, and if it is his pleasure to grant what I ask and to agree to my 
request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet I intend to give them tomorrow, and then I shall do as the 
king says”. 

Est 5:9 Haman left full of joy and high spirits that day; but when he saw Mordecai at the Chancellery, neither 
standing up nor stirring at his approach, he felt a gust of anger. 

Est 5:10 He restrained himself, however. Returning home, he sent for his friends and Zeresh his wife 

Est 5:1 1 and held forth to them about his dazzling wealth, his many children, how the king had raised him to a 

position of honour and promoted him over the heads of the king’s officers-of-state and ministers. 

Est 5:12 “What is more”, he added, “Queen Esther has just invited me and the king — no one else except me — to 
a banquet she was giving, and better still she has invited me and the king again tomorrow. 

Est 5:13 But what do I care about all this when all the while I see Mordecai the Jew sitting there at the 
Chancellery?”. 

Est 5:14 “Have a fifty-cubit gallows run up”, said Zeresh his wife and all his friends, “and in the morning ask the 
king to have Mordecai hanged on it. Then you can go with the king to the banquet, without a care in the world!”. 
Delighted with this advice, Haman had the gallows erected. 

Est 6:1 That night the king could not sleep; he called for the Record Book, or Annals, to be brought and read to 
him. 

Est 6:2 They contained an account of how Mordecai had denounced Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king’s 
eunuchs serving as Guards of the Threshold, who had plotted to assassinate King Ahasuerus. 

Est 6:3 “And what honour and dignity”, the king asked, “was conferred on Mordecai for this?”. “Nothing has been 
done for him”, the gentlemen-in-waiting replied. 

Est 6:4 The king then said, “Who is outside in the antechamber?”. Haman had, that very moment, entered the 



outer antechamber of the private apartments, to ask the king to have Mordecai hanged on the gallows which he 
had just put up for the purpose. 

Est 6:5 So the king’s gentlemen-in-waiting replied, “It is Haman out in the antechamber”. “Bring him in”, the king 
said, 

Est 6:6 and, as soon as Haman came in, went on to ask, “What is the right way to treat a man whom the king 
wishes to honour?”. “Whom”, thought Haman, “would the king wish to honour, if not me?”. 

Est 6:7 So he replied, “If the king wishes to honour someöne, 

Est 6:8 royal robes should be brought from the king’s wardrobe, and a horse from the king’s stable, sporting a 
royal diadem on its head. 

Est 6:9 The robes and horse should be entrusted to one of the noblest of the king’s officers-of-state, who should 
then array the man whom the king wishes to honour and lead him on horseback through the city square, 
proclaiming before him: ‘This is the way a man shall be treated whom the king wishes to honour’”. 

Est 6:10 “Hurry”, the king said to Haman, “take the robes and the horse, and do everything you have just said to 
Mordecai the Jew, who works at the Chancellery. On no account leave out anything that you have mentioned”. 
Est 6:1 1 So taking the robes and the horse, Haman arrayed Mordecai and led him on horseback through the 
city square, proclaiming before him: “This is the way a man shall be treated whom the king wishes to honour”. 

Est 6:12 After this Mordecai returned to the Chancellery, while Haman went hurrying home in dejection and 
covering his face. 

Est 6:13 He told his wife Zeresh and all his friends what had just happened. His wife Zeresh and his friends 
said, “You are beginning to fall, and Mordecai to rise; if he is Jewish, you will never get the better of him. With 
him against you, your fall is certain”. 

Est 6:14 While they were still talking, the king’s officers arrived in a hurry to escort Haman to the banquet that 
Esther was giving. 

Est 7:1 The king and Haman went to Queen Esther’s banquet, 

Est 7:2 and this second day, during the banquet, the king again said to Esther, “Tell me your request, Queen 
Esther. I grant it to you. Whatever you want; even if it is half my kingdom, it is yours for the asking”. 

Est 7:3 “If I have found favour in your eyes, O king”, Queen Esther replied, “and if it please your majesty, grant 
me my life — that is my request; and the lives of my people — that is what I want. 

Est 7:4 For we have been handed over, my people and I, to destruction, slaughter and annihilation; had we 
merely been sold as slaves and servant-girls, I should not have said anything; but in the present case, it will be 
beyond the persecutor’s means to make good the loss that the king is about to sustain”. 

Est 7:5 King Ahasuerus interrupted Queen Esther, “Who is this man?”. he exclaimed. “Where is the man who has 
thought of doing such a thing?”. 

Est 7:6 Esther replied, “The persecutor, the enemy? Why, this wretch Haman!”. Haman quaked with terror in the 
presence of the king and queen. 

Est 7:7 In a rage the king got up from the banquet and went into the palace garden; while Haman, realising that 
the king was determined on his ruin, stayed behind to beg Queen Esther for his life. 

Est 7:8 When the king came back from the palace garden into the banqueting hall, he found Haman sprawled 
across the couch where Esther was reclining. “What!”. the king exclaimed. “Is he going to rape the queen in my 
own palace?”. The words were scarcely out of his mouth than a veil was thrown over Haman’s face. 

Est 7:9 In the royal presence, Harbona, one of the officers, said, “There is that fifty-cubit gallows, too, which 
Haman ran up for Mordecai, who spoke up to the king’s great advantage. It is all ready at his house”. “Hang him 
on it”, said the king. 

Est 7:10 So Haman was hanged on the gallows which he had erected for Mordecai, and the king’s wrath 
subsided. 

Est 8:1 That same day King Ahasuerus gave Queen Esther the house of Haman, the persecutor of the Jews. 
Mordecai was presented to the king, Esther having revealed their mutual relationship. 

Est 8:2 The king, who had recovered his signet ring from Haman, took it off and gave it to Mordecai, while 
Esther gave Mordecai charge of Haman’s house. 

Est 8:3 Esther again went to speak to the king. She fell at his feet, weeping and imploring his favour, to frustrate 
the malice that Haman the Agagite had been plotting against the Jews. 

Est 8:4 The king held out the golden sceptre to her, whereupon Esther stood up and faced him. 

Est 8:5 “If such is the king’s good pleasure”, she said, “and if I have found favour before him, if my petition seems 
proper to him and if I myself am pleasing to his eyes, may he be pleased to issue a written revocation of the 
letters which Haman son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, has had written, ordering the destruction of the Jews 
throughout the royal provinces. 

Est 8:6 For how can I look on, while my people suffer what is proposed for them? How can I bear to witness the 
extermination of my relatives?”. 

Est 8:7 King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, “I for my part have given Esther 



Haman’s house, and have had him hanged on the gallows for planning to destroy the Jews. 

Est 8:8 You, for your part, write what you please as regards the Jews, in the king’s name, and seal it with the 
king’s signet; for any edict written in the king’s name and sealed with his signet is irrevocable”. 

Est 8:9 The royal scribes were summoned at once — it was the third month, the month of Sivan, on the twenty- 
third day — and at Mordecai’s dictation an order was written to the Jews, the satraps, governors and principal 
officials of the provinces stretching from India to Ethiopia, a hundred and twenty-seven provinces, to each 
province in its own script, and to each people in its own language, and to the Jews in their own script and 
language. 

Est 8:10 These letters, written in the name of King Ahasuerus and sealed with the king’s signet, were carried by 
couriers mounted on horses from the king’s own stud-farms. 

Est 8:1 1 In them the king granted the Jews, in whatever city they lived, the right to assemble in self-defence, 
with permission to destroy, slaughter and annihilate any armed force of any people or province that might attack 
them, together with their women and children, and to plunder their possessions, 

Est 8:12 with effect from the same day throughout the provinces of King Ahasuerus — the thirteenth day of the 
twelfth month, which is Adar. (a) The text of the letter was as follows: (b) “The Great King, Ahasuerus, to the 
satraps of the hundred and twenty-seven provinces which stretch from India to Ethiopia, to the provincial 
governors and to all our loyal subjects, greeting: (c) “Many people, repeatedly honoured by the extreme bounty 
of their benefactors, only grow the more arrogant. It is not enough for them to seek our subjects’ injury, but 
unable as they are to support the weight of their own surfeit they turn to scheming against their benefactors 
themselves, (d) Not content with banishing gratitude from the human heart, but elated by the plaudits of people 
unacquainted with goodness, notwithstanding that all is for ever under the eye of God, they expect to escape his 
justice, so hostile to the wicked, (e) Thus it has often happened to those placed in authority that, having 
entrusted friends with the conduct of affairs and allowed themselves to be influenced by them, they find 
themselves sharing with these the guilt of innocent blood and involved in irremediable misfortunes, (f) the upright 
intentions of rulers having been misled by false arguments of the evilly disposed, (g) This may be seen without 
recourse to the history of earlier times to which we have referred; you have only to look at what is before you, at 
the crimes perpetrated by a plague of unworthy officials, (h) For the future, we shall exert our efforts to assure 
the tranquillity and peace of the realm for all, (i) by adopting new policies and by always judging matters that are 
brought to our notice in the most equitable spirit, (k) “Thus Haman son of Hammedatha, a Macedonian, without a 
drop of Persian blood and far removed from our goodness, enjoyed our hospitality (I) and was treated by us with 
the benevolence which we show to every nation, even to the extent of being proclaimed our “father” and being 
accorded universally the prostration of respect as second in dignity to the royal throne, (m) But he, unable to 
keep within his own high rank, schemed to deprive us of our realm and of our life, (n) Furthermore, by tortuous 
wiles and arguments, he would have had us destroy Mordecai, our saviour and constant benefactor, with Esther 
the blameless partner of our majesty, and their whole nation besides, (o) Fie thought by these means to leave us 
without support and so to transfer the Persian empire to the Macedonians, (p) “But we find that the Jews, marked 
out for annihilation by this arch-scoundrel, are not criminals: they are in fact governed by the most just of laws. 

(q) They are children of the Most High, the great and living God to whom we and our ancestors owe the 
continuing prosperity of our realm, (r) You will therefore do well not to act on the letters sent by Haman son of 
Hammedatha, since their author has been hanged at the gates of Susa with his whole household: a fitting 
punishment, which God, Master of the Universe, has speedily inflicted on him. (s) Put up copies of this letter 
everywhere, allow the Jews to observe their own customs without fear, and come to their help against anyone 
who attacks them on the day originally chosen for their maltreatment, that is, the thirteenth day of the twelfth 
month, which is Adar. (t) For the all-powerful God has made this day a day of joy and not of ruin for the chosen 
people, (u) You, for your part, among your solemn festivals celebrate this as a special day with every kind of 
feasting, so that now and in the future, for you and for Persians of good will, it may commemorate your rescue, 
and for your enemies may stand as a reminder of their ruin, (v) “Every city and, more generally, every country, 
which does not follow these instructions, will be mercilessly devastated with fire and sword, and made not only 
inaccessible to human beings but hateful to wild animals and even birds for ever”. 

Est 8:13 Copies of this edict, to be promulgated as law in each province, were published to the various peoples, 
so that the Jews could be ready on the day stated to avenge themselves on their enemies. 

Est 8:14 The couriers, mounted on the king’s horses, set out in great haste and urgency at the king’s command. 
The edict was also published in the citadel of Susa. 

Est 8:15 Mordecai left the royal presence in a princely gown of violet and white, with a great golden crown and a 
cloak of fine linen and purple. The city of Susa shouted for joy. 

Est 8:16 For the Jews there was light and gladness, joy and honour. 

Est 8:17 In every province and in every city, wherever the king’s command and decree arrived, there was joy 
and gladness among the Jews, with feasting and holiday-making. Of the country’s population many became 
Jews, since now the Jews were feared. 



Est 9:1 The king’s command and decree came into force on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, Adar, and 
the day on which the enemies of the Jews had hoped to crush them produced the very opposite effect: the Jews 
it was who crushed their enemies. 

Est 9:2 In their towns throughout the provinces of King Ahasuerus, the Jews assembled to strike at those who 
had planned to injure them. No one resisted them, since the various peoples were now all afraid of them. 

Est 9:3 Provincial officers-of-state, satraps, governors and royal officials, all supported the Jews for fear of 
Mordecai. 

Est 9:4 And indeed Mordecai was a power in the palace and his fame was spreading through all the provinces; 
Mordecai was steadily growing more powerful. 

Est 9:5 So the Jews struck down all their enemies with the sword, with resulting slaughter and destruction, and 
worked their will on their opponents. 

Est 9:6 In the citadel of Susa alone, the Jews put to death and slaughtered five hundred men, 

Est 9:7 notably Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha, 

Est 9:8 Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha, 

Est 9:9 Parmashtha, Arisai, Aridai and Jezatha, 

Est 9:10 the ten sons of Haman son of Hammedatha, the persecutor of the Jews. But they took no plunder. 

Est 9:11 The number of those killed in the citadel of Susa was reported to the king that same day. 

Est 9:12 The king said to Queen Esther, “In the citadel of Susa the Jews have killed five hundred men and also 
the ten sons of Haman. What must they have done in the other provinces of the realm? Tell me your request; I 
grant it to you. Tell me what else you would like; it is yours for the asking”. 

Est 9:13 “If such is the king’s pleasure”, Esther replied, “let the Jews of Susa be allowed to enforce today’s 
decree tomorrow as well. And as for the ten sons of Haman, let their bodies be hanged on the gallows”. 

Est 9:14 Whereupon, the king having given the order, the edict was promulgated in Susa and the ten sons of 
Haman were hanged. 

Est 9:15 Thus the Jews of Susa reassembled on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar and killed three 
hundred men in the city. But they took no plunder. 

Est 9:16 The other Jews who lived in the king’s provinces also assembled to defend their lives and rid 
themselves of their enemies. They slaughtered seventy-five thousand of their opponents. But they took no 
plunder. 

Est 9:17 This was on the thirteenth day of the month of Adar. On the fourteenth day they rested and made it a 
day of feasting and gladness. 

Est 9:18 But for the Jews of Susa, who had assembled on the thirteenth and fourteenth days, the fifteenth was 
the day they rested, making that a day of feasting and gladness. 

Est 9:19 This is why Jewish country people, those who live in undefended villages, keep the fourteenth day of 
the month of Adar as a day of gladness, feasting and holiday-making, and the exchanging of presents with one 
another, (a) whereäs for those who live in cities the day of rejoicing and exchanging presents with their 
neighbours is the fifteenth day of Adar. 

Est 9:20 Mordecai committed these events to writing. Then he sent letters to all the Jews living in the provinces 
of King Ahasuerus, both near and far, 

Est 9:21 enjoining them to celebrate the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month of Adar every year, 

Est 9:22 as the days on which the Jews had rid themselves of their enemies, and the month in which their 
sorrow had been turned into gladness, and mourning into a holiday. He therefore told them to keep these as 
days of festivity and gladness when they were to exchange presents and make gifts to the poor. 

Est 9:23 Once having begun, the Jews continued observing these practices, Mordecai having written them an 
account 

Est 9:24 of how Haman son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the persecutor of all the Jews, had plotted their 
destruction and had cast the pur, that is, the lot, for their overthrow and ruin; 

Est 9:25 but how, when he went back to the king to ask him to order the hanging of Mordecai, the wicked 
scheme which he had devised against the Jews recoiled on his own head, and both he and his sons were 
hanged on the gallows; 

Est 9:26 and that, hence, these days were called Purim, from the word pur. And so, because of what was 
written in this letter, and because of what they had seen for themselves and of what had happened to them, 

Est 9:27 the Jews willingly bound themselves, their descendants and all who should join them, to celebrate 
these two days without fail, in the manner prescribed and at the time appointed, year after year. 

Est 9:28 Thus commemorated and celebrated from generation to generation, in every family, in every province, 
in every city, these days of Purim will never be abrogated among the Jews, nor will their memory perish from 
their race. 

Est 9:29 Queen Esther, the daughter of Abihail, wrote with full authority to ratify this second letter, 

Est 9:30 and sent letters to all the Jews of the hundred and twenty-seven provinces of the realm of Ahasuerus, 



in terms of peace and loyalty 

Est 9:31 enjoining them to observe these days of Purim at the appointed time, as Mordecai the Jew had 
recommended, and in the manner prescribed for themselves and their descendants, with additional ordinances 
for fasts and lamentations. 

Est 9:32 The ordinance of Esther fixed the law of Purim, which was then recorded in a book. 

Est 1 0:1 King Ahasuerus put not only the mainland under tribute but the Mediterranean islands as well. 

Est 1 0:2 All his feats of power and valour, and the account of the high honour to which he raised Mordecai: all 
this is recorded in the Book of the Annals of the Kings of Media and Persia. 

Est 10:3 And Mordecai the Jew was next in rank to King Ahasuerus. He was a man held in respect among the 
Jews, esteemed by thousands of his brothers, a man who sought the good of his people and cared for the 
welfare of his entire race, (a) And Mordecai said, All this is God’s doing, (b) I remember the dream I had about 
these matters, nothing of which has failed to come true: (c) the little spring that became a river, the light that 
shone, the sun, the flood of water. Esther is the river — she whom the king married and made queen, (d) The two 
dragons are Haman and myself, (e) The nations are those that banded together to blot out the name of Jew. (f) 
The single nation, mine, is Israel, those who cried out to God and were saved. Yes, the Lord has saved his 
people, the Lord has delivered us from all these evils, God has worked such signs and great wonders as have 
never occurred among the nations, (g) Two destinies he appointed, one for his own people, one for the nations 
at large, (h) And these two destinies were worked out at the hour and time and day laid down by God, involving 
all the nations, (i) In this way God has remembered his people and vindicated his heritage; (k) and for them 
these days, the fourteenth and fifteenth of the month of Adar, are to be days of assembly, of joy and of gladness 
before God, through all generations and for ever among his people Israel”. (I) In the fourth year of the reign of 
Ptolemy and Cleopatra, Dositheus, who affirmed that he was a priest and Levite, and Ptolemy his son brought 
the foregoing letter concerning Purim. They vouched for its authenticity, the translation having been made by 
Lysimachus son of Ptolemy, a member of the Jerusalem community. 

1 Ma 1:1 Alexander of Macedon son of Philip had come from the land of Kittim and defeated Darius king of the 
Persians and Medes, whom he succeeded as ruler, at first of Hellas. 

1 Ma 1:2 He undertook many campaigns, gained possession of many fortresses, and put the local kings to 
death. 

IMa 1:3 So he advanced to the ends of the earth, plundering nation after nation; the earth grew silent before 
him, and his ambitious heart swelled with pride. 

IMa 1:4 He assembled very powerful forces and subdued provinces, nations and princes, and they became his 
tributaries. 

IMa 1:5 But the time came when Alexander took to his bed, in the knowledge that he was dying. 

IMa 1:6 He summoned his officers, noblemen who had been brought up with him from his youth, and divided 
his kingdom among them while he was still alive. 

IMa 1:7 Alexander had reigned twelve years when he died. 

IMa 1:8 Each of his officers established himself in his own region. 

IMa 1:9 All assumed crowns after his death, they and their heirs after them for many years, bringing increasing 
evils on the world. 

IMa 1:10 From these there grew a wicked offshoot, Antiochus Epiphanes son of King Antiochus; once a 
hostage in Rome, he became king in the 107th year of the kingdom of the Greeks. 

1 Ma 1 :1 1 It was then that there emerged from Israel a set of renegades who led many people astray. “Come”, 
they said, “let us ally ourselves with the gentiles surrounding us, for since we separated ourselves from them 
many misfortunes have overtaken us”. 

IMa 1:12 This proposal proved acceptable, 

IMa 1:13 and a number of the people eagerly approached the king, who authorised them to practise the 
gentiles’ observances. 

1 Ma 1 :14 So they built a gymnasium in Jerusalem, such as the gentiles have, 

IMa 1:15 disguised their circumcision, and abandoned the holy covenant, submitting to gentile rule as willing 
slaves of impiety. 

IMa 1:16 Once Antiochus had seen his authority established, he determined to make himself king of Egypt and 
the ruler of both kingdoms. 

IMa 1:17 He invaded Egypt in massive strength, with chariots and elephants (and cavalry) and a large fleet. 

IMa 1:18 He engaged Ptolemy king of Egypt in battle, and Ptolemy turned back and fled before his advance, 
leaving many casualties. 

IMa 1:19 The fortified cities of Egypt were captured, and Antiochus plundered the country. 

IMa 1:20 After his conquest of Egypt, in the year 143, Antiochus turned about and advanced on Israel and 
Jerusalem in massive strength. 

1 Ma 1 :21 Insolently breaking into the sanctuary, he removed the golden altar and the lamp-stand for the light 



with all its fittings, 

1 Ma 1 :22 together with the table for the loaves of permanent offering, the libation vessels, the cups, the golden 
censers, the veil, the crowns, and the golden decoration on the front of the Temple, which he stripped of 
everything. 

1 Ma 1 :23 He made off with the silver and gold and precious vessels; he discovered the secret treasures and 
seized them 

IMa 1:24 and, removing all these, he went back to his own country, having shed much blood and uttered words 
of extreme arrogance. 

1 Ma 1 :25 There was deep mourning for Israel throughout the country: 

IMa 1:26 Rulers and elders groaned; girls and young men wasted away; the women’s beauty suffered a 
change; 

IMa 1:27 every bridegroom took up a dirge, the bride sat grief-stricken on her marriage-bed. 

1 Ma 1 :28 The earth quaked because of its inhabitants and the whole House of Jacob was clothed with shame. 

1 Ma 1 :29 Two years later the king sent the Mysarch through the cities of Judah. He came to Jerusalem with an 
impressive force, 

IMa 1:30 and addressing them with what appeared to be peaceful words, he gained their confidence; then 
suddenly he fell on the city, dealing it a terrible blow, and destroying many of the people of Israel. 

1 Ma 1 :31 He pillaged the city and set it on fire, tore down its houses and encircling wall, 

IMa 1:32 took the women and children captive and commandeered the cattle. 

1 Ma 1 :33 They then rebuilt the City of David with a great strong wall and strong towers and made this their 
Citadel. 

1 Ma 1 :34 There they installed a brood of sinners, of renegades, who fortified themselves inside it, 

IMa 1:35 storing arms and provisions, and depositing there the loot they had collected from Jerusalem; they 
were to prove a great trouble. 

1 Ma 1 :36 It became an ambush for the sanctuary, an evil adversary for Israel at all times. 

IMa 1:37 They shed innocent blood all round the sanctuary and defiled the sanctuary itself. 

IMa 1:38 The citizens of Jerusalem fled because of them, she became a dwelling-place of strangers; estranged 
from her own offspring, her children forsook her. 

1 Ma 1 :39 Her sanctuary became as forsaken as a desert, her feasts were turned into mourning, her Sabbaths 
into a mockery, her honour into reproach. 

1 Ma 1 :40 Her dishonour now fully matched her former glory, her greatness was turned into grief. 

1 Ma 1 :41 The king then issued a proclamation to his whole kingdom that all were to become a single people, 
each nation renouncing its particular customs. 

IMa 1:42 All the gentiles conformed to the king’s decree, 

IMa 1:43 and many Israelites chose to accept his religion, sacrificing to idols and profaning the Sabbath. 

1 Ma 1 :44 The king also sent edicts by messenger to Jerusalem and the towns of Judah, directing them to adopt 
customs foreign to the country, 

IMa 1:45 banning burnt offerings, sacrifices and libations from the sanctuary, profaning Sabbaths and feasts, 
IMa 1:46 defiling the sanctuary and everything holy, 

IMa 1:47 building altars, shrines and temples for idols, sacrificing pigs and unclean beasts, 

1 Ma 1 :48 leaving their sons uncircumcised, and prostituting themselves to all kinds of impurity and abomination, 
1 Ma 1 :49 so that they should forget the Law and revoke all observance of it. 

1 Ma 1 :50 Anyone not obeying the king’s command was to be put to death. 

1 Ma 1 :51 Writing in such terms to every part of his kingdom, the king appointed inspectors for the whole people 
and directed all the towns of Judah to offer sacrifice city by city. 

1 Ma 1 :52 Many of the people — that is, every apostate from the Law — rallied to them and so committed evil in 
the country, 

IMa 1:53 forcing Israel into hiding in any possible place of refuge. 

1 Ma 1 :54 On the fifteenth day of Chislev in the year 145 the king built the appalling abomination on top of the 
altar of burnt offering; and altars were built in the surrounding towns of Judah 
1 Ma 1 :55 and incense offered at the doors of houses and in the streets. 

1 Ma 1 :56 Any books of the Law that came to light were torn up and burned. 

1 Ma 1 :57 Whenever anyone was discovered possessing a copy of the covenant or practising the Law, the 
king’s decree sentenced him to death. 

1 Ma 1 :58 Month after month they took harsh action against any offenders they discovered in the towns of Israel. 

1 Ma 1 :59 On the twenty-fifth day of each month, sacrifice was offered on the altar erected on top of the altar of 

burnt offering. 

IMa 1:60 Women who had had their children circumcised were put to death according to the edict 
1 Ma 1 :61 with their babies hung round their necks, and the members of their household and those who had 



performed the circumcision were executed with them. 

IMa 1:62 Yet there were many in Israel who stood firm and found the courage to refuse unclean food. 

1 Ma 1 :63 They chose death rather than contamination by such fare or profanation of the holy covenant, and 
they were executed. 

1 Ma 1 :64 It was a truly dreadful retribution that visited Israel. 

1 Ma 2:1 About then, Mattathias son of John, son of Simeon, a priest of the line of Joarib, left Jerusalem and 
settled in Modein. 

IMa 2:2 He had five sons, John known as Gaddi, 

IMa 2:3 Simon called Thassi, 

IMa 2:4 Judas called Maccabaeus, 

IMa 2:5 Eleazar, called Avaran, and Jonathan called Apphus. 

IMa 2:6 When he saw the blasphemies being committed in Judah and Jerusalem, 

1 Ma 2:7 he said, “Alas that I should have been born to witness the ruin of my people and the ruin of the Holy 
City, and to sit by while she is delivered over to her enemies, and the sanctuary into the hand of foreigners. 

1 Ma 2:8 “Her Temple has become like someöne of no repute, 

1 Ma 2:9 the vessels that were her glory have been carried off as booty, her babies have been slaughtered in 
her streets, her young men by the enemy’s sword. 

IMa 2:10 Is there a nation that has not claimed a share of her royal prerogatives, that has not taken some of her 
spoils? 

1 Ma 2:1 1 All her ornaments have been snatched from her, her former freedom has become slavery. 

IMa 2:12 See how the Holy Place, our beauty, our glory, is now laid waste, see how the gentiles have profaned 
it! 

IMa 2:13 What have we left to live for?”. 

1 Ma 2:14 Mattathias and his sons tore their garments, put on sackcloth, and observed deep mourning. 

IMa 2:15 The king’s commissioners who were enforcing the apostasy came to the town of Modein for the 
sacrifices. 

IMa 2:16 Many Israelites gathered round them, but Mattathias and his sons drew apart. 

IMa 2:17 The king’s commissioners then addressed Mattathias as follows, “You are a respected leader, a great 
man in this town; you have sons and brothers to support you. 

IMa 2:18 Be the first to step forward and conform to the king’s decree, as all the nations have done, and the 
leaders of Judah and the survivors in Jerusalem; you and your sons shall be reckoned among the Friends of the 
King, you and your sons will be honoured with gold and silver and many presents”. 

IMa 2:19 Raising his voice, Mattathias retorted, “Even if every nation living in the king’s dominions obeys him, 
each forsaking its ancestral religion to conform to his decrees, 

1 Ma 2:20 I, my sons and my brothers will still follow the covenant of our ancestors. 

1 Ma 2:21 May Heaven preserve us from forsaking the Law and its observances. 

1 Ma 2:22 As for the king’s orders, we will not follow them: we shall not swerve from our own religion either to 
right or to left”. 

1 Ma 2:23 As he finished speaking, a Jew came forward in the sight of all to offer sacrifice on the altar in Modein 
as the royal edict required. 

1 Ma 2:24 When Mattathias saw this, he was fired with zeal; stirred to the depth of his being, he gave vent to his 
legitimate anger, threw himself on the man and slaughtered him on the altar. 

1 Ma 2:25 At the same time he killed the king’s commissioner who was there to enforce the sacrifice, and tore 
down the altar. 

1 Ma 2:26 In his zeal for the Law he acted as Phinehas had against Zimri son of Salu. 

1 Ma 2:27 Then Mattathias went through the town, shouting at the top of his voice, “Let everyone who has any 
zeal for the Law and takes his stand on the covenant come out and follow me”. 

IMa 2:28 Then he fled with his sons into the hills, leaving all their possessions behind in the town. 

1 Ma 2:29 Many people who were concerned for virtue and justice went down to the desert and stayed there, 

1 Ma 2:30 taking with them their sons, their wives and their cattle, so oppressive had their sufferings become. 

1 Ma 2:31 Word was brought to the royal officials and forces stationed in Jerusalem, in the City of David, that 
those who had repudiated the king’s edict had gone down to the hiding places in the desert. 

1 Ma 2:32 A strong detachment went after them, and when it came up with them ranged itself against them in 
battle formation, preparing to attack them on the Sabbath day, 

1 Ma 2:33 and said, “Enough of this! Come out and do as the king orders and you will be spared”. 

IMa 2:34 The others, however, replied, “We refuse to come out, and we will not obey the king’s orders and 
profane the Sabbath day”. 

1 Ma 2:35 The royal forces at once went into action, 

1 Ma 2:36 but the others offered no opposition; not a stone was thrown, there was no barricading of the hiding 



places. 

1 Ma 2:37 They only said, “Let us all die innocent; let heaven and earth bear witness that you are massacring us 
with no pretence of justice”. 

1 Ma 2:38 The attack was pressed home on the Sabbath itself, and they were slaughtered, with their wives and 
children and cattle, to the number of one thousand persons. 

IMa 2:39 When the news reached Mattathias and his friends, they mourned them bitterly 
1 Ma 2:40 and said to one another, “If we all do as our brothers have done, and refuse to fight the gentiles for our 
lives and institutions, they will only destroy us the sooner from the earth”. 

1 Ma 2:41 So then and there they came to this decision, “If anyone attacks us on the Sabbath day, whoëver he 
may be, we shall resist him; we must not all be killed, as our brothers were in the hiding places”. 

1 Ma 2:42 Soon they were joined by the Hasidaean party, stout fighting men of Israel, each one a volunteer on 
the side of the Law. 

IMa 2:43 All the refugees from the persecution rallied to them, giving them added support. 

IMa 2:44 They organised themselves into an armed force, striking down the sinners in their anger, and the 
renegades in their fury, and those who escaped them fled to the gentiles for safety. 

IMa 2:45 Mattathias and his friends made a tour, overthrowing the altars 

IMa 2:46 and forcibly circumcising all the boys they found uncircumcised in the territories of Israel. 

IMa 2:47 They hunted down the upstarts and managed their campaign to good effect. 

1 Ma 2:48 They wrested the Law out of the control of the gentiles and the kings and reduced the sinners to 
impotence. 

1 Ma 2:49 As the days of Mattathias were drawing to a close, he said to his sons, “Arrogance and outrage are 
now in the ascendant; it is a period of turmoil and bitter hatred. 

1 Ma 2:50 This is the time, my children, for you to have a burning zeal for the Law and to give your lives for the 
covenant of our ancestors. 

IMa 2:51 Remember the deeds performed by our ancestors, each in his generation, and you will win great 
honour and everlasting renown. 

1 Ma 2:52 Was not Abraham tested and found faithful, was that not considered as justifying him? 

IMa 2:53 Joseph in the time of his distress maintained the Law, and so became lord of Egypt. 

1 Ma 2:54 Phinehas, our father, in return for his burning zeal, received the covenant of everlasting priesthood. 

1 Ma 2:55 Joshua, for carrying out his task, became judge of Israel. 

IMa 2:56 Caleb, for his testimony before the assembled people, received an inheritance in the land. 

1 Ma 2:57 David for his generous heart inherited the throne of an everlasting kingdom. 

1 Ma 2:58 Elijah for his consuming fervour for the Law was caught up to heaven itself. 

1 Ma 2:59 Hananiah, Azariah and Mishael, for their fidelity, were saved from the flame. 

1 Ma 2:60 Daniel for his singleness of heart was rescued from the lion’s jaws. 

1 Ma 2:61 Know then that, generation after generation, no one who hopes in him will be overcome. 

1 Ma 2:62 Do not fear the threats of the sinner, all his brave show must come to the dunghill and the worms. 

1 Ma 2:63 Exalted today, tomorrow he is nowhere to be found, for he has returned to the dust he came from and 

his scheming is brought to nothing. 

1 Ma 2:64 My children, be resolute and courageous for the Law, for it will bring you glory. 

1 Ma 2:65 “Here is your brother Simeon, I know he is a man of sound judgement. Listen to him all your lives; let 
him take your father’s place. 

1 Ma 2:66 Judas Maccabaeus, strong and brave from his youth, let him be your general and conduct the war 
against the gentiles. 

1 Ma 2:67 The rest of you are to enrol in your ranks all those who keep the Law, and to assure the vengeance of 
your people. 

1 Ma 2:68 Pay back the gentiles to the full, and hold fast to the ordinance of the Law”. 

1 Ma 2:69 Then he blessed them and was joined to his ancestors. 

IMa 2:70 He died in the year 146 and was buried in his ancestral tomb at Modein, and all Israel mourned him 
deeply. 

IMa 3:1 His son, Judas, known as Maccabaeus, then took his place. 

1 Ma 3:2 All his brothers, and all who had attached themselves to his father, supported him, and they fought for 
Israel with a will. 

IMa 3:3 He extended the fame of his people. Like a giant, he put on the breastplate and buckled on his war 
harness; he engaged in battle after battle, protecting the ranks with his sword. 

IMa 3:4 He was like a lion in his exploits, like a young lion roaring over its prey. 

IMa 3:5 He pursued and tracked down the renegades, he consigned those who troubled his people to the 
flames. 

IMa 3:6 The renegades quailed with the terror he inspired, all evil-doers were utterly confounded, and 



deliverance went forward under his leadership. 

IMa 3:7 He brought bitterness to many a king and rejoicing to Jacob by his deeds, his memory is blessed for 
ever and ever. 

1 Ma 3:8 He went through the towns of Judah eliminating the irreligious from them, and diverted the Retribution 
from Israel. 

1 Ma 3:9 His name resounded to the ends of the earth, he rallied those who were on the point of perishing. 

IMa 3:10 Next, Apollonius mustered the gentiles and a large force from Samaria to make war on Israel. 

1 Ma 3:1 1 When Judas learned of it, he went out to meet him and routed and killed him. Many fell wounded, and 
the survivors took to flight. 

IMa 3:12 Their spoils were seized and the sword of Apollonius was taken by Judas, who used it to fight with 
throughout his life. 

IMa 3:13 On hearing that Judas had raised a mixed force of believers and seasoned fighters, 

1 Ma 3:14 Seron, commander of the Syrian troops, said, “I shall make a name for myself and gain honour in the 
kingdom if I fight Judas and those supporters of his who are so contemptuous of the king’s orders”. 

IMa 3:15 He therefore launched another expedition, with a strong army of unbelievers to support him in taking 
revenge on the Israelites. 

IMa 3:16 He had nearly reached the descent of Beth-Horon when Judas went out to confront him with a handful 
of men. 

IMa 3:17 But as soon as these saw the force advancing to meet them, they said to Judas, “How can we, few as 
we are, engage such overwhelming numbers? We are exhausted as it is, not having had anything to eat today”. 
IMa 3:18 “It is easy”, Judas answered, “for a great number to be defeated by a few; indeed, in the sight of 
Heaven, deliverance, whether by many or by few, is all one; 

IMa 3:19 for victory in war does not depend on the size of the fighting force: Heaven accords the strength. 

IMa 3:20 They are coming against us in full-blown insolence and lawlessness to destroy us, our wives and our 
children, and to plunder us; 

1 Ma 3:21 but we are fighting for our lives and our laws, 

1 Ma 3:22 and he will crush them before our eyes; do not be afraid of them”. 

1 Ma 3:23 When he had finished speaking, he made a sudden sally against Seron and his force and 
overwhelmed them. 

1 Ma 3:24 Judas pursued them down from Beth-Horon as far as the plain. About eight hundred of their men fell, 
and the rest took refuge in the country of the Philistines. 

IMa 3:25 Judas and his brothers began to be feared, and alarm seized the surrounding peoples. 

IMa 3:26 His name even reached the king’s ears, and among the nations there was talk of Judas and his 
battles. 

1 Ma 3:27 The news of these events infuriated Antiochus, and he ordered mobilisation of all the forces in his 
kingdom, a very powerful army. 

IMa 3:28 Opening his treasury, he distributed a year’s pay to his troops, telling them to be prepared for any 
eventuality. 

1 Ma 3:29 He then found that the money in his coffers had run short and that the tribute of the province had 
decreased, as a result of the dissension and disaster brought on the country by his own abrogation of laws that 
had been in force from antiquity. 

1 Ma 3:30 He began to fear that, as had happened more than once, he would not have enough to cover the 
expenses and the lavish bounties he had previously been accustomed to make on a larger scale than his 
predecessors on the throne. 

1 Ma 3:31 In this grave quandary he resolved to invade Persia, there to levy tribute on the provinces and so 
accumulate substantial funds. 

IMa 3:32 He therefore left Lysias, a nobleman and member of the royal family, to manage the royal affairs 
between the River Euphrates and the Egyptian frontier, 

1 Ma 3:33 making him responsible for the education of his son Antiochus, until he should come back. 

1 Ma 3:34 To him Antiochus made over half his forces, with the elephants, giving him instructions about what he 
wanted done, particularly with regard to the inhabitants of Judaea and Jerusalem, 

1 Ma 3:35 against whom he was to send a force, to crush and destroy the power of Israel and the remnant of 
Jerusalem, to wipe out their very memory from the place, 

1 Ma 3:36 to settle foreigners in all parts of their territory and to distribute their land into lots. 

1 Ma 3:37 The king took the remaining half of his troops with him and set out from Antioch, the capital of his 
kingdom, in the year 147; he crossed the River Euphrates and made his way through the Upper Provinces. 

IMa 3:38 Lysias chose Ptolemy son of Dorymenes, with Nicanor and Gorgias, influential men from among the 
Friends of the King, 

IMa 3:39 and, under their command, despatched forty thousand foot and seven thousand horse to invade the 



land of Judah and devastate it, as the king had ordered. 

IMa 3:40 The entire force set out and reached the neighbourhood of Emmaus in the lowlands, where they 
pitched camp. 

1 Ma 3:41 The local merchants, hearing the news of this, arrived at the camp, bringing with them a large amount 
of gold and silver, and fetters as well, proposing to buy the Israelites as slaves; they were accompanied by a 
company from Idumaea and the Philistine country. 

1 Ma 3:42 Judas and his brothers saw that the situation was going from bad to worse and that armies were 
camping in their territory; they were also well aware that the king had ordered the people’s total destruction. 

1 Ma 3:43 So they said to each other, “Let us restore the ruins of our people and fight for our people and our 
sanctuary”. 

1 Ma 3:44 The Assembly was summoned, to prepare for war, to offer prayer and to implore compassion and 
mercy. 

1 Ma 3:45 Jerusalem was as empty as a desert, none of her children to go in and out. The sanctuary was 
trodden underfoot, men of an alien race held the Citadel, which had become a lodging for gentiles. There was no 
more rejoicing for Jacob, the flute and lyre were mute. 

1 Ma 3:46 After mustering, they made their way to Mizpah, opposite Jerusalem, since Mizpah was traditionally a 
place of prayer for Israel. 

1 Ma 3:47 That day they fasted and put on sackcloth, covering their heads with ashes and tearing their 
garments. 

1 Ma 3:48 For the guidance that the gentiles would have sought from the images of their false gods, they opened 
the Book of the Law. 

1 Ma 3:49 They also brought out the priestly vestments, with first-fruits and tithes, and marshalled the Nazirites 
who had completed the period of their vow. 

IMa 3:50 Then, raising their voices to Heaven, they cried, “What shall we do with these people, and where are 
we to take them? 

IMa 3:51 Your holy place has been trampled underfoot and defiled, your priests mourn in their humiliation, 

1 Ma 3:52 and now the gentiles are in alliance to destroy us: you know what they have in mind for us. 

1 Ma 3:53 How can we stand up and face them if you do not come to our aid?”. 

IMa 3:54 Then they sounded the trumpets and raised a great shout. 

1 Ma 3:55 Next, Judas appointed leaders for the people, to command a thousand, a hundred, fifty or ten men. 

1 Ma 3:56 Those who were in the middle of building a house, or were about to be married, or were planting a 
vineyard, or were afraid, he told to go home again, as the Law allowed. 

1 Ma 3:57 The column then marched off and took up a position south of Emmaus. 

IMa 3:58 “Stand to your arms”, Judas told them, “acquit yourselves bravely, in the morning be ready to fight 
these gentiles massed against us to destroy us and our sanctuary. 

1 Ma 3:59 Better for us to die in battle than to watch the ruin of our nation and our Holy Place. 

IMa 3:60 Whatever be the will of Heaven, he will perform it”. 

1 Ma 4:1 Gorgias took with him five thousand foot and a thousand picked cavalry, and the force moved off by 
night 

1 Ma 4:2 with the object of attacking the Jewish position and dealing them an unexpected blow; the men from 
the Citadel were there to guide him. 

1 Ma 4:3 Judas got wind of it and himself moved off with his fighters to strike at the royal army at Emmaus, 

IMa 4:4 while its fighting troops were still dispersed outside the camp. 

1 Ma 4:5 Hence, when Gorgias reached Judas’ camp, he found no one and began looking for the Jews in the 
mountains. “For”, he said, “we have got them on the run”. 

1 Ma 4:6 First light found Judas in the plain with three thousand men, although these lacked the armour and 
swords they would have wished. 

1 Ma 4:7 They could now see the gentile encampment with its strong fortifications and cavalry surrounding it, 
clearly people who understood warfare. 

1 Ma 4:8 Judas said to his men, “Do not be afraid of their numbers, and do not flinch at their attack. 

IMa 4:9 Remember how our ancestors were delivered at the Red Sea when Pharaoh was pursuing them in 
force. 

IMa 4:10 And now let us call on Heaven: if he cares for us, he will remember his covenant with our ancestors 
and will destroy this army confronting us today; 

1 Ma 4:1 1 then all the nations will know for certain that there is One who ransoms and saves Israel”. 

IMa 4:12 The foreigners looked up and, seeing the Jews advancing against them, 

IMa 4:13 came out of the camp to join battle. Judas’ men sounded the trumpet 

IMa 4:14 and engaged them. The gentiles were defeated and fled towards the plain 

IMa 4:15 and all the stragglers fell by the sword. The pursuit continued as far as Gezer and the plains of 



Idumaea, Azotus and Jamnia, and the enemy lost about three thousand men. 

IMa 4:16 Breaking off the pursuit, Judas returned with his men 

IMa 4:17 and said to the people, “Never mind the booty, for we have another battle ahead of us. 

IMa 4:18 Gorgias and his troops are still near us in the mountains. First stand up to our enemies and fight them, 
and then you can safely collect the booty”. 

IMa 4:19 The words were hardly out of Judas’ mouth, when a detachment came into view, peering down from 
the mountain. 

1 Ma 4:20 Observing that their own troops had been routed and that the camp had been fired — since the smoke, 
which they could see, attested the fact- 

1 Ma 4:21 they were panic-stricken at the sight; and when, furthermore, they saw Judas’ troops drawn up for 
battle on the plain, 

IMa 4:22 they all fled into Philistine territory. 

1 Ma 4:23 Judas then turned back to plunder the camp, and a large sum in gold and silver, with violet and sea- 
purple stuffs, and many other valuables were carried off. 

IMa 4:24 On their return, the Jews chanted praises to Fleaven, singing, “Fie is kind and his love is everlasting!”. 

1 Ma 4:25 That day had seen a remarkable deliverance in Israel. 

IMa 4:26 Those of the foreigners who had escaped came and gave Lysias an account of all that had happened. 
IMa 4:27 The news shocked and dismayed him, for affairs in Israel had not gone as he intended, and the result 
was quite the opposite to what the king had ordered. 

IMa 4:28 The next year he mobilised sixty thousand picked troops and five thousand cavalry with the intention 
of finishing off the Jews. 

IMa 4:29 They advanced into Idumaea and made their base at Beth-Zur, where Judas met them with ten 
thousand men. 

IMa 4:30 When he saw their military strength he offered this prayer, “Blessed are you, Saviour of Israel, who 
shattered the mighty warrior’s attack at the hand of your servant David, and delivered the Philistine camp into the 
hands of Jonathan son of Saul, and his armour-bearer. 

1 Ma 4:31 Crush this expedition in the same way at the hands of your people Israel; let their troops and cavalry 
bring them nothing but shame. 

IMa 4:32 Sow panic in their ranks, confound the confidence they put in their numbers and send them reeling in 
defeat. 

1 Ma 4:33 Overthrow them by the sword of those who love you, and all who acknowledge your name will sing 
your praises”. 

1 Ma 4:34 The two forces engaged, and five thousand men of Lysias’ troops fell in hand-to-hand fighting. 

1 Ma 4:35 Seeing the rout of his army and the courage of Judas’ troops and their readiness to live or die nobly, 
Lysias withdrew to Antioch, where he recruited mercenaries for a further invasion of Judaea in even greater 
strength. 

IMa 4:36 Judas and his brothers then said, “Now that our enemies have been defeated, let us go up to purify 
the sanctuary and dedicate it”. 

1 Ma 4:37 So they marshalled the whole army, and went up to Mount Zion. 

1 Ma 4:38 There they found the sanctuary deserted, the altar desecrated, the gates burnt down, and vegetation 
growing in the courts as it might in a wood or on some mountain, while the storerooms were in ruins. 

IMa 4:39 They tore their garments and mourned bitterly, putting dust on their heads. 

IMa 4:40 They prostrated themselves on the ground, and when the trumpets gave the signal they cried aloud to 
Fleaven. 

IMa 4:41 Judas then ordered his men to keep the Citadel garrison engaged until he had purified the sanctuary. 

1 Ma 4:42 Next, he selected priests who were blameless and zealous for the Law 
1 Ma 4:43 to purify the sanctuary and remove the stones of the “Pollution” to some unclean place. 

1 Ma 4:44 They discussed what should be done about the altar of burnt offering which had been profaned, 

1 Ma 4:45 and very properly decided to pull it down, rather than later be embarrassed about it since it had been 
defiled by the gentiles. They therefore demolished it 

1 Ma 4:46 and deposited the stones in a suitable place on the hill of the Dwelling to await the appearance of a 
prophet who should give a ruling about them. 

1 Ma 4:47 They took unhewn stones, as the Law prescribed, and built a new altar on the lines of the old one. 

IMa 4:48 They restored the Holy Place and the interior of the Dwelling, and purified the courts. 

1 Ma 4:49 They made new sacred vessels, and brought the lamp-stand, the altar of incense, and the table into 
the Temple. 

1 Ma 4:50 They burned incense on the altar and lit the lamps on the lamp-stand, and these shone inside the 
Temple. 

1 Ma 4:51 They placed the loaves on the table and hung the curtains and completed all the tasks they had 



undertaken. 

IMa 4:52 On the twenty-fifth of the ninth month, Chislev, in the year 148 they rose at dawn 
1 Ma 4:53 and offered a lawful sacrifice on the new altar of burnt offering which they had made. 

1 Ma 4:54 The altar was dedicated, to the sound of hymns, zithers, lyres and cymbals, at the same time of year 
and on the same day on which the gentiles had originally profaned it. 

IMa 4:55 The whole people fell prostrate in adoration and then praised Heaven who had granted them success. 
1 Ma 4:56 For eight days they celebrated the dedication of the altar, joyfully offering burnt offerings, communion 
and thanksgiving sacrifices. 

IMa 4:57 They ornamented the front of the Temple with crowns and bosses of gold, renovated the gates and 
storerooms, providing the latter with doors. 

IMa 4:58 There was no end to the rejoicing among the people, since the disgrace inflicted by the gentiles had 
been effaced. 

1 Ma 4:59 Judas, with his brothers and the whole assembly of Israel, made it a law that the days of the 
dedication of the altar should be celebrated yearly at the proper season, for eight days beginning on the twenty- 
fifth of the month of Chislev, with rejoicing and gladness. 

1 Ma 4:60 They then proceeded to build high walls with strong towers round Mount Zion, to prevent the gentiles 
from coming and riding roughshod over it as in the past. 

1 Ma 4:61 Judas stationed a garrison there to guard it; he also fortified Beth-Zur, so that the people would have 
a fortress confronting Idumaea. 

IMa 5:1 When the surrounding nations heard that the altar had been rebuilt and the sanctuary restored to what 
it had been before, they became very angry 

1 Ma 5:2 and decided to destroy the descendants of Jacob living among them; they began to murder and evict 
our people. 

IMa 5:3 Judas made war on the sons of Esau in Idumaea, in the region of Acrabattene where they were 
besieging the Israelites. He dealt them a serious blow, drove them off and despoiled them. 

1 Ma 5:4 He also remembered the wickedness of the sons of Baean, who were a menace and a trap for the 
people with their ambushes on the roads. 

1 Ma 5:5 Having blockaded them in their town and besieged them, he put them under the curse of destruction; 
he then set fire to their towers and burned them down with everyone inside. 

1 Ma 5:6 Next, he crossed over to the Ammonites where he found a strong fighting force and a numerous 
people, commanded by Timotheus. 

IMa 5:7 He fought many battles with them, defeated them and cut them to pieces. 

1 Ma 5:8 Having captured Jazer and its dependent villages, he retired to Judaea. 

1 Ma 5:9 Next, the gentiles of Gilead banded together to destroy the Israelites living in their territory. The latter, 
however, took refuge in the fortress of Dathema, 

IMa 5:10 and sent the following letter to Judas and his brothers: The gentiles round us have banded 
themselves together against us to destroy us, 

1 Ma 5:1 1 and they are preparing to storm the fortress in which we have taken refuge; Timotheus is in command 
of their forces. 

IMa 5:12 Come at once and rescue us from their clutches, for we have already suffered great losses. 

IMa 5:13 All our countrymen living in Tobias’ country have been killed, their women and children have been 
taken into captivity, their property has been seized, and about a thousand men have been destroyed there”. 

1 Ma 5:14 While the letter was being read, other messengers arrived from Galilee with their garments torn, 
bearing similar news, 

IMa 5:15 “The people of Ptolemais, Tyre and Sidon have joined forces with the whole of gentile Galilee to 
destroy us!”. 

IMa 5:16 When Judas and the people heard this, they held a great assembly to decide what should be done for 
their oppressed countrymen who were under attack from their enemies. 

IMa 5:17 Judas said to his brother Simon, “Pick your men and go and relieve your countrymen in Galilee, while 
my brother Jonathan and I make our way into Gilead”. 

IMa 5:18 He left Joseph son of Zechariah and the people’s leader Azariah with the remainder of the army in 
Judaea to keep guard, and gave them these orders, 

IMa 5:19 “You are to be responsible for our people. Do not engage the gentiles until we return”. 

1 Ma 5:20 Simon was allotted three thousand men for the expedition into Galilee, Judas eight thousand for 
Gilead. 

IMa 5:21 Simon advanced into Galilee, engaged the gentiles in several battles and swept all before him; 

1 Ma 5:22 he pursued them to the gate of Ptolemais, and they lost about three thousand men, whose spoils he 
collected. 

1 Ma 5:23 With him, he took away the Jews of Galilee and Arbatta, with their wives and children and all their 



possessions, and brought them into Judaea with great rejoicing. 

IMa 5:24 Meanwhile Judas Maccabaeus and his brother Jonathan crossed the Jordan and made a three-days’ 
march through the desert, 

IMa 5:25 where they encountered the Nabataeans, who gave them a friendly reception and told them 
everything that had been happening to their brothers in Gilead, 

IMa 5:26 many of whom, they said, were shut up in Bozrah and Bosor, Alema, Chaspho, Maked and Carnaim, 
all large fortified towns. 

1 Ma 5:27 Others were blockaded in the other towns of Gilead, and the enemy planned to attack and capture 
these strongholds the very next day, and destroy all the people inside them on one day. 

1 Ma 5:28 Judas and his army at once turned off by the desert road to Bozrah. He took the town and, having put 
all the males to the sword and collected the booty, burned it down. 

IMa 5:29 When night came, he left the place, and they continued their march until they reached the fortress. 

1 Ma 5:30 In the light of dawn they looked, and there was an innumerable horde, setting up ladders and engines 
to capture the fortress; the assault was just beginning. 

1 Ma 5:31 When Judas saw that the attack had begun and that the war cry was rising to heaven from the city, 
mingled with trumpet calls and a great clamour, 

1 Ma 5:32 he said to the men of his army, “Into battle today for your brothers!”. 

IMa 5:33 Dividing them into three commands, he advanced on the enemy’s rear, with trumpets sounding and 
prayers shouted aloud. 

IMa 5:34 The troops of Timotheus, recognising that this was Maccabaeus, fled before his advance; 

Maccabaeus dealt them a crushing defeat; about eight thousand of their men fell that day. 

IMa 5:35 Then, wheeling on Alema, he attacked and captured it and, having killed all the males and collected 
the booty, burned the place down. 

1 Ma 5:36 From there he moved on and took Chaspho, Maked, Bosor and the remaining towns of Gilead. 

1 Ma 5:37 After these events, Timotheus mustered another force and pitched camp opposite Raphon, on the far 
side of the stream-bed. 

IMa 5:38 Judas sent men to reconnoitre the camp, and these reported back as follows, “With him are massed 
all the gentiles surrounding us, making a very numerous army, 

IMa 5:39 with Arab mercenaries as auxiliaries; they are encamped on the far side of the stream-bed, and ready 
to launch an attack on you”. Judas then advanced to engage them, 

1 Ma 5:40 and was approaching the watercourse with his troops when Timotheus told the commanders of his 
army, “If he crosses first we shall not be able to resist him, because he will have a great advantage over us; 

1 Ma 5:41 but if he is afraid and camps on the other side of the stream, we shall cross over to him and the 
advantage will then be ours”. 

IMa 5:42 As soon as Judas reached the watercourse, he posted people’s scribes along it, giving them this 
order: “Do not let anyone pitch his tent; all are to go into battle!”. 

1 Ma 5:43 He was himself the first across to the enemy side, with all the people following. He defeated all the 
opposing gentiles, who threw down their arms and ran for refuge in the sanctuary of Carnaim. 

IMa 5:44 The Jews first captured the town and then burned down the temple with everyone inside. And so 
Carnaim was overthrown, and the enemy could offer no further resistance to Judas. 

IMa 5:45 Next, Judas assembled all the Israelites living in Gilead, from the least to the greatest, with their 
wives, children and belongings, an enormous muster, to take them to Judaea. 

1 Ma 5:46 They reached Ephron, a large town straddling the road and strongly fortified. As it was impossible to 
by-pass it either to right or to left, there was nothing for it but to march straight through. 

IMa 5:47 But the people of the town denied them passage and barricaded the gates with stones. 

1 Ma 5:48 Judas sent them a conciliatory message in these terms, “We want to pass through your territory to 
reach our own; no one will do you any harm, we only want to go through on foot”. But they would not open up for 
him. 

1 Ma 5:49 So Judas sent an order down the column for everyone to halt where he stood. 

IMa 5:50 The fighting men took up their positions; Judas attacked the town all day and night, and the town fell 
to him. 

1 Ma 5:51 He put all the males to the sword, rased the town to the ground, plundered it and marched through the 
town square over the bodies of the dead. 

IMa 5:52 They then crossed the Jordan into the Great Plain, opposite Beth-Shean, 

IMa 5:53 Judas all the time rallying the stragglers and encouraging the people the whole way until they reached 
Judaea. 

1 Ma 5:54 They climbed Mount Zion in joy and gladness and presented burnt offerings because they had 
returned safe and sound without having lost a single man. 

IMa 5:55 While Judas and Jonathan were in Gilead and Simon his brother in Galilee outside Ptolemais, 



1 Ma 5:56 Joseph son of Zechariah, and Azariah, who were in command of the army, heard of their valiant 
deeds and of the battles they had been fighting, 

1 Ma 5:57 and said, “Let us make a name for ourselves too and go and fight the nations around us”. 

1 Ma 5:58 So they issued orders to the men under their command and marched on Jamnia. 

IMa 5:59 Gorgias and his men came out of the town and gave battle. 

1 Ma 5:60 Joseph and Azariah were routed and pursued as far as the frontiers of Judaea. That day about two 
thousand Israelites lost their lives. 

1 Ma 5:61 Our people thus met with a great reverse, because they had not listened to Judas and his brothers, 
thinking that they would do something equally valiant. 

1 Ma 5:62 They were not, however, of the same breed of men as those to whom the deliverance of Israel was 
entrusted. 

IMa 5:63 The noble Judas and his brothers, however, were held in high honour throughout Israel and among all 
the nations wherever their name was heard, 

IMa 5:64 and people thronged round to acclaim them. 

1 Ma 5:65 Judas marched out with his brothers to fight the Edomites in the country towards the south; he 
stormed Hebron and its dependent villages, threw down its fortifications and burned down its encircling towers. 
IMa 5:66 Leaving there, he made for the country of the Philistines and passed through Marisa. 

1 Ma 5:67 Among the fallen in that day’s fighting were some priests who sought to prove their courage there by 
joining in the battle, a foolhardy venture. 

IMa 5:68 Judas next turned on Azotus, which belonged to the Philistines; he overthrew their altars, burned the 
statues of their gods and, having pillaged their towns, withdrew to Judaea. 

1 Ma 6:1 King Antiochus, meanwhile, was making his way through the Upper Provinces; he had heard that in 
Persia there was a city called Elymais, renowned for its riches, its silver and gold, 

IMa 6:2 and its very wealthy temple containing golden armour, breastplates and weapons, left there by 
Alexander son of Philip, the king of Macedon, the first to reign over the Greeks. 

1 Ma 6:3 He therefore went and attempted to take the city and pillage it, but without success, the citizens having 
been forewarned. 

1 Ma 6:4 They resisted him by force of arms. He was routed, and began retreating, very gloomily, towards 
Babylon. 

1 Ma 6:5 But, while he was still in Persia, news reached him that the armies which had invaded Judaea had 
been routed, 

1 Ma 6:6 and that Lysias in particular had advanced in massive strength, only to be forced to turn and flee before 
the Jews; that the latter were now stronger than ever, thanks to the arms, supplies and abundant spoils acquired 
from the armies they had cut to pieces, 

1 Ma 6:7 and that they had pulled down the abomination which he had erected on the altar in Jerusalem, had 
encircled the sanctuary with high walls as in the past, and had fortified Beth-Zur, one of his cities. 

IMa 6:8 When the king heard this news he was amazed and profoundly shaken; he threw himself on his bed 
and fell sick with grief, since things had not turned out for him as he had planned. 

IMa 6:9 And there he remained for many days, subject to deep and recurrent fits of melancholy, until he 
realised that he was dying. 

IMa 6:10 Then, summoning all his Friends, he said to them, “Sleep evades my eyes, and my heart is cowed by 
anxiety. 

1 Ma 6:1 1 I have been wondering how I could have come to such a pitch of distress, so great a flood as that 
which now engulfs me — 1 who was so generous and well-loved in my heyday. 

IMa 6:12 But now I recall how wrongly I acted in Jerusalem when I seized all the vessels of silver and gold 
there and ordered the extermination of the inhabitants of Judah for no reason at all. 

IMa 6:13 This, I am convinced, is why these misfortunes have overtaken me, and why I am dying of melancholy 
in a foreign land”. 

1 Ma 6:14 He summoned Philip, one of his Friends, and made him regent of the whole kingdom. 

IMa 6:15 He entrusted him with his diadem, his robe and his signet, on the understanding that he was to 
educate his son Antiochus and train him for the throne. 

IMa 6:16 King Antiochus then died, in the year 149. 

IMa 6:17 Lysias, learning that the king was dead, established on the throne in succession to him his son 
Antiochus, whom he had brought up from childhood — and styled him Eupator. 

IMa 6:18 The people in the Citadel at the time were blockading Israel round the sanctuary and were taking 
every opportunity to harm them and to support the gentiles. 

IMa 6:19 Judas decided that they must be destroyed, and he mobilised the whole people to besiege them. 

IMa 6:20 They assembled and laid siege to the Citadel in the year 150, building batteries and siege-engines. 

1 Ma 6:21 But some of the besieged broke through the blockade, and to these a number of renegades from 



Israel attached themselves. 

1 Ma 6:22 They made their way to the king and said, “How much longer are you going to wait before you see 
justice done and avenge our fellows? 

1 Ma 6:23 We were content to serve your father, to comply with his orders, and to obey his edicts. 

IMa 6:24 As a result our own people will have nothing to do with us; what is more, they have killed all those of 
us they could catch, and looted our family property. 

1 Ma 6:25 Nor is it on us alone that their blows have fallen, but on all your territories. 

IMa 6:26 At this moment, they are laying siege to the Citadel of Jerusalem, to capture it, and they have fortified 
the sanctuary and Beth-Zur. 

1 Ma 6:27 Unless you forestall them at once, they will go on to even bigger things, and then you will never be 
able to control them”. 

IMa 6:28 The king was furious when he heard this and summoned all his Friends, the generals of his forces 
and the marshals of horse. 

IMa 6:29 He recruited mercenaries from other kingdoms and the Mediterranean islands. 

IMa 6:30 His forces numbered a hundred thousand foot soldiers, twenty thousand cavalry and thirty-two 
elephants with experience of battle conditions. 

1 Ma 6:31 They advanced through Idumaea and besieged Beth-Zur, pressing the attack for days on end; they 
also constructed siege-engines, but the defenders made a sortie and set these on fire, putting up a brave 
resistance. 

1 Ma 6:32 At this, Judas left the Citadel and pitched camp at Beth-Zechariah opposite the royal encampment. 
IMa 6:33 The king rose at daybreak and marched his army at top speed down the road to Beth-Zechariah, 
where his forces took up their battle formations and sounded the trumpets. 

1 Ma 6:34 The elephants were given a syrup of grapes and mulberries to prepare them for the battle. 

IMa 6:35 These animals were distributed among the phalanxes, to each elephant being allocated a thousand 
men dressed in coats of mail with bronze helmets on their heads; five hundred picked horsemen were also 
assigned to each beast. 

1 Ma 6:36 The horsemen anticipated every move their elephant made; wherever it went they went with it, never 
quitting it. 

IMa 6:37 On each elephant, to protect it, was a stout wooden tower, kept in position by girths, each with its 
three combatants, as well as its mahout. 

1 Ma 6:38 The remainder of the cavalry was stationed on one or other of the two flanks of the army, to harass 
the enemy and cover the phalanxes. 

1 Ma 6:39 When the sun glinted on the bronze and golden shields, the mountains caught the glint and gleamed 
like fiery torches. 

1 Ma 6:40 One part of the royal army was deployed on the upper slopes of the mountain and the other in the 
valley below; they advanced in solid, well-disciplined formation. 

1 Ma 6:41 Everyone trembled at the noise made by this vast multitude, the thunder of the troops on the march 
and the clanking of their armour, for it was an immense and mighty army. 

IMa 6:42 Judas and his army advanced to give battle, and six hundred of the king’s army were killed. 

IMa 6:43 Eleazar, called Avaran, noticing that one of the elephants was royally caparisoned and was also taller 
than all the others, and supposing that the king was mounted on it, 

IMa 6:44 sacrificed himself to save his people and win an imperishable name. 

1 Ma 6:45 Boldly charging towards the creature through the thick of the phalanx, dealing death to right and left, 
so that the enemy scattered on either side at his onslaught, 

1 Ma 6:46 he darted in under the elephant, thrust at it from underneath, and killed it. The beast collapsed on top 
of him, and he died on the spot. 

IMa 6:47 The Jews however realising how strong the king was and how ferocious his army, retreated ahead of 
them. 

1 Ma 6:48 The royal army moved up to encounter them outside Jerusalem, and the king began to blockade 
Judaea and Mount Zion. 

1 Ma 6:49 He granted peace terms to the people of Beth-Zur, who evacuated the town; it lacked store of 
provisions to withstand a siege, since the land was enjoying a sabbatical year. 

IMa 6:50 Having occupied Beth-Zur, the king stationed a garrison there to hold it. 

1 Ma 6:51 He besieged the sanctuary for a long time, erecting batteries and siege-engines, flame-throwers and 
ballistas, scorpions to discharge arrows, and catapults. 

1 Ma 6:52 The defenders countered these by constructing their own engines and were thus able to prolong their 
resistance. 

1 Ma 6:53 But they had no food in their stores since it was the seventh year, and because those who had taken 
refuge in Judaea from the gentiles had eaten up the last of their reserves. 



1 Ma 6:54 Only a few men were left in the Holy Place, owing to the severity of the famine; the rest had dispersed 
and gone home. 

IMa 6:55 Meanwhile Philip, whom King Antiochus before his death had appointed to train his son Antiochus for 
the throne, 

IMa 6:56 had returned from Persia and Media with the forces that had accompanied the king, and was planning 
to seize control of affairs. 

1 Ma 6:57 On hearing this, Lysias at once decided to leave, and said to the king, the generals of the army and 
the men, “We are growing weaker every day, we are short of food, and the place we are besieging is well 
fortified; moreover the affairs of the kingdom demand our attention. 

1 Ma 6:58 Let us offer the hand of friendship to these men and make peace with them and with their whole 
nation. 

1 Ma 6:59 Let us grant them permission to follow their own customs as before, since it is our abolition of these 
customs that has provoked them into acting like this”. 

IMa 6:60 The king and his commanders approved this argument, and he offered the Jews peace terms, which 
they accepted. 

1 Ma 6:61 The king and the generals ratified the treaty by oath, and the besieged accordingly left the fortress. 
IMa 6:62 The king then entered Mount Zion, but on seeing how impregnable the place was, he broke the oath 
he had sworn and gave orders for the encircling wall to be demolished. 

1 Ma 6:63 He then hurriedly withdrew, making off for Antioch, where he found Philip already master of the city. 
Antiochus gave battle and captured the city by force of arms. 

IMa 7:1 In the year 151 , Demetrius son of Seleucus left Rome and arrived with a few men at a town on the 
coast, where he inaugurated his reign. 

IMa 7:2 It so happened that, as he was entering the royal residence of his ancestors, the army captured 
Antiochus and Lysias, and intended to bring them to him. 

1 Ma 7:3 On hearing this, he said, “Keep them out of my sight”. 

1 Ma 7:4 The army put them to death, and Demetrius ascended his throne. 

IMa 7:5 Next, all those Israelites without law or piety, led by Alcimus, whose ambition was to become high 
priest, 

IMa 7:6 approached the king and denounced our people to him. “Judas and his brothers”, they said, “have killed 
all your friends, and he has driven us out of our country. 

1 Ma 7:7 Send someöne now whom you can trust; let him go and see the wholesale ruin Judas has brought on 
us and on the king’s dominions, and let him punish the wretches and all who assist them”. 

IMa 7:8 The king chose Bacchides, one of the Friends of the King, governor of Transeuphrates, an important 
personage in the kingdom and loyal to the king. 

IMa 7:9 He sent him with the godless Alcimus, whom he confirmed in the high priesthood, with orders to exact 
retribution from the Israelites. 

IMa 7:10 So they set out with a large force and, on reaching Judaea, sent emissaries to Judas and his brothers 
with proposals peaceable yet treacherous. 

1 Ma 7:1 1 The latter, however, did not put any faith in their words, aware that they had come with a large force. 
IMa 7:12 Nevertheless, a commission of scribes presented themselves before Alcimus and Bacchides, to sue 
for just terms. 

IMa 7:13 The first among the Israelites to ask them for peace terms were the Hasidaeans, 

IMa 7:14 who reasoned thus, “This is a priest of Aaron’s line who has come with the armed forces; he will not 
wrong us”. 

IMa 7:15 He did in fact discuss peace terms with them and gave them his oath, “We shall not attempt to injure 
you or your friends”. 

IMa 7:16 They believed him, but he arrested sixty of them and put them to death on one day, fulfilling the words 
of scripture: 

IMa 7:17 They have scattered the bodies of your faithful, and shed their blood all round Jerusalem, leaving no 
one to bury them! 

IMa 7:18 At this, fear and dread gripped the whole people. “There is no truth or virtue in them”, they said, “they 
have broken their agreement and their sworn oath”. 

IMa 7:19 Bacchides then left Jerusalem and encamped at Beth-Zeth, and from there sent and arrested many of 
the men who had deserted him and a few of our people too; he had them killed and thrown down the great well. 

1 Ma 7:20 He then put Alcimus in charge of the province, leaving an army with him to support him; Bacchides 
himself returned to the king. 

IMa 7:21 Alcimus continued his struggle to become high priest, 

IMa 7:22 and all who were disturbing the peace of their own people rallied to him, and, having won control of 
Judaea, did much harm in Israel. 



1 Ma 7:23 Seeing that all the wrongs done to the Israelites by Alcimus and his supporters exceeded what the 
gentiles had done, 

1 Ma 7:24 Judas went right round the whole territory of Judaea to take vengeance on those who had deserted 
him and to prevent their free movement about the country. 

IMa 7:25 When Alcimus saw how strong Judas and his supporters had grown and realised that he was 
powerless to resist them, he went back to the king, to whom he made malicious accusations against them. 

1 Ma 7:26 The king sent Nicanor, one of his generals ranking as Illustrious and a bitter enemy of Israel, with 
orders to exterminate the people. 

IMa 7:27 Reaching Jerusalem with a large force, Nicanor sent a friendly, yet treacherous, message to Judas 
and his brothers, as follows: 

IMa 7:28 “Let us have no fighting between you and me; I shall come with a small escort for a peaceful meeting 
with you”. 

IMa 7:29 He met Judas and they exchanged friendly greetings; the enemy, however, had made preparations to 
abduct Judas. 

IMa 7:30 When Judas became aware of Nicanor’s treacherous purpose in coming to see him, he took fright and 
refused any further meeting. 

1 Ma 7:31 Nicanor then realised that his plan had been discovered, and took the field against Judas, to give 
battle near Caphar-Salama. 

1 Ma 7:32 About five hundred of Nicanor’s men fell; the rest took refuge in the City of David. 

1 Ma 7:33 After these events Nicanor went up to Mount Zion. Some of the priests came out of the Holy Place 
with some elders, to give him a friendly welcome and show him the burnt offering being presented for the king. 
IMa 7:34 But he ridiculed them, laughed at them, defiled them and used insolent language, swearing in his 
rage, 

1 Ma 7:35 “Unless Judas is handed over to me this time with his army, as soon as I am safely back, I promise 
you, I shall burn this building down!”. 

1 Ma 7:36 Then he went off in a fury. At this, the priests went in again, and stood weeping in front of the altar 
and the Temple, saying, 

1 Ma 7:37 “You have chosen this house to be called by your name, to be a house of prayer and petition for your 
people. 

1 Ma 7:38 Take vengeance on this man and on his army, and let them fall by the sword; remember their 
blasphemies and give them no respite”. 

1 Ma 7:39 Nicanor left Jerusalem and encamped at Beth-Horon, where he was joined by an army from Syria. 
IMa 7:40 Judas, meanwhile, camped at Adasa with three thousand men, and offered this prayer, 

1 Ma 7:41 “When the king’s envoys blasphemed, your angel went out and struck down one hundred and eighty- 
five thousand of his men. 

1 Ma 7:42 In the same way let us see you crush this army today, so that everyone else may know that this man 
has spoken blasphemously against your sanctuary: pass judgement on him as his wickedness deserves!”. 

IMa 7:43 The armies met in battle on the thirteenth of the month Adar, and Nicanor’s army was crushed, he 
himself being the first to fall in the battle. 

1 Ma 7:44 When Nicanor’s soldiers saw him fall, they threw down their arms and fled. 

1 Ma 7:45 The Jews pursued them a day’s journey, from Adasa to the approaches of Gezer; they sounded their 
trumpets in warning as they followed them, 

1 Ma 7:46 and people came out of all the surrounding Judaean villages to encircle the fugitives, who then turned 
back on their own men. All fell by the sword, not one being left alive. 

IMa 7:47 Having collected the spoils and booty, they cut off Nicanor’s head and the right hand he had stretched 
out in a display of insolence; these were taken and displayed within sight of Jerusalem. 

1 Ma 7:48 The people were overjoyed and kept that day as a great holiday: 

IMa 7:49 indeed they decided to celebrate it annually on the thirteenth of Adar. 

1 Ma 7:50 For a short while Judaea enjoyed peace. 

1 Ma 8:1 Now Judas had heard of the reputation of the Romans: how strong they were, and how well disposed 
towards any who made common cause with them, making a treaty of friendship with anyone who approached 
them. 

1 Ma 8:2 (And, indeed, they were extremely powerful.) He had been told of their wars and of their prowess 
among the Gauls, whom they had conquered and put under tribute; 

1 Ma 8:3 and of all they had done in the province of Spain to gain possession of the silver and gold mines there, 
IMa 8:4 making themselves masters of the whole country by their determination and perseverance, despite its 
great distance from their own; of the kings who came from the ends of the earth to attack them, only to be 
crushed by them and overwhelmed with disaster, and of others who paid them annual tribute; 

1 Ma 8:5 Philip, Perseus king of the Kittim, and others who had dared to make war on them, had been defeated 



and reduced to subjection, 

IMa 8:6 while Antiochus the Great, king of Asia, who had advanced to attack them with a hundred and twenty 
elephants, cavalry, chariots and a very large army, had also suffered defeat at their hands; 

IMa 8:7 they had taken him alive and imposed on him and his successors, on agreed terms, the payment of an 
enormous tribute, the surrender of hostages, and the cession 

1 Ma 8:8 of the Indian territory, with Media, Lydia, and some of their best provinces, which they took from him 
and gave to King Eumenes. 

IMa 8:9 Judas had also heard how, when the Greeks planned an expedition to destroy the Romans, 

IMa 8:10 the latter had got wind of it and, sending a single general against them, had fought a campaign in 
which they inflicted heavy casualties, carried their women and children away into captivity, pillaged their goods, 
subdued their country, tore down their fortresses and reduced them to a slavery lasting to the present day; 

1 Ma 8:1 1 and how they had destroyed and subjugated all the other kingdoms and islands that resisted them. 
IMa 8:12 But where their friends and those who relied on them were concerned, they had always stood by their 
friendship. They had subdued kings far and near, and all who heard their name went in terror of them. 

IMa 8:13 One man, if they determined to help him and advance him to a throne, would certainly occupy it, while 
another, if they so determined, would find himself deposed; their influence was paramount. 

1 Ma 8:14 In spite of all this, no single one of them had assumed a crown or put on the purple for his own 
aggrandisement. 

IMa 8:15 They had set up a senate, where three hundred and twenty councillors deliberated daily, constantly 
debating how best to regulate public affairs. 

IMa 8:16 They entrusted their government to one man for a year at a time, with absolute power over their whole 
empire, and this man was obeyed by all without envy or jealousy. 

IMa 8:17 Having chosen Eupolemus son of John, of the family of Accos, and Jason son of Eleazar, Judas sent 
them to Rome to make a treaty of friendship and alliance with these people, 

IMa 8:18 in the hope of being rid of the yoke, for they could see that Greek rule was reducing Israel to slavery. 
IMa 8:19 The envoys made the lengthy journey to Rome and presented themselves before the Senate with 
their formal proposal: 

IMa 8:20 “Judas Maccabaeus and his brothers, with the Jewish people, have sent us to you to conclude a treaty 
of alliance and peace with you, and to enrol ourselves as your allies and friends”. 

1 Ma 8:21 The proposal met with the approval of the senators. 

1 Ma 8:22 Here is a copy of the rescript which they engraved on bronze tablets and sent to Jerusalem to be kept 
there by the Jews as a record of peace and alliance: 

IMa 8:23 “Good fortune attend the Romans and the Jewish nation by sea and land for ever; may sword or 
enemy be far from them! 

1 Ma 8:24 “If war comes first to Rome or any of her allies throughout her dominions, 

1 Ma 8:25 the Jewish nation will take action as her ally, as occasion may require, and do it wholeheartedly. 

1 Ma 8:26 They will not give or supply to the enemy any grain, arms, money or ships: thus has Rome decided, 
and they are to honour their obligations without guarantees. 

1 Ma 8:27 In the same way, if war comes first to the Jewish nation, the Romans will support them energetically 
as occasion may offer, 

1 Ma 8:28 and the aggressor will not be furnished with grain, arms, money or ships: such is the Roman decision, 
and they will honour these obligations without treachery. 

1 Ma 8:29 Such are the articles under which the Romans have concluded their treaty with the Jewish people. 

1 Ma 8:30 If, later, either party should decide to make any addition or deletion, they will be free to do so, and any 
such addition or deletion will be binding. 

1 Ma 8:31 “As regards the wrongs done to them by King Demetrius, we have written to him in these terms: Why 
have you made your yoke lie heavy on our friends and allies the Jews? 

1 Ma 8:32 If they appeal against you again, we shall uphold their rights and make war on you by sea and land”. 

1 Ma 9:1 Demetrius, hearing that Nicanor and his army had fallen in battle, sent Bacchides and Alcimus a 
second time into Judaea, and with them the right wing of his army. 

IMa 9:2 They took the road to Galilee and besieged Mesaloth in Arbela, and captured it, putting many people to 
death. 

IMa 9:3 In the first month of the year 152, they encamped outside Jerusalem; 

1 Ma 9:4 they then moved on, making their way to Beer-Zaith with twenty thousand foot and two thousand horse. 
IMa 9:5 Judas lay in camp at Elasa, with three thousand picked men. 

1 Ma 9:6 When they saw the huge size of the enemy forces they were terrified, and many slipped out of the 
camp, until no more than eight hundred of the force were left. 

IMa 9:7 With battle now inevitable, Judas realised that his army had melted away; he was aghast, for he had no 
time to rally them. 



1 Ma 9:8 Yet, dismayed as he was, he said to those who were left, “Up! Let us face the enemy; we may yet have 
the strength to fight them”. 

1 Ma 9:9 His men tried to dissuade him, declaring, “We have no strength for anything but to escape with our lives 
this time; then we can come back with our brothers to fight them; by ourselves we are too few”. 

IMa 9:10 Judas retorted, “That I should do such a thing as run away from them! If our time has come, at least 
let us die like men for our countrymen, and leave nothing to tarnish our reputation”. 

1 Ma 9:1 1 The army marched out of camp and drew up, facing the enemy. The cavalry was drawn up in two 
squadrons; the slingers and archers marched in the van of the army, and all the best fighters were put in the 
front rank; 

IMa 9:12 Bacchides was on the right wing. The phalanx advanced from between the two squadrons, sounding 
the trumpets; the men on Judas’ side also blew their trumpets, 

IMa 9:13 and the earth shook with the noise of the armies. The engagement lasted from morning until evening. 
IMa 9:14 Judas saw that Bacchides and the main strength of his army lay on the right; all the stout-hearted 
rallied to him, 

IMa 9:15 and they crushed the right wing, pursuing them as far as the Azara Hills. 

IMa 9:16 But when the Syrians on the left wing saw that the right had been broken, they turned and followed 
hot on the heels of Judas and his men to take them in the rear. 

IMa 9:17 The fight became desperate, and there were many casualties on both sides. 

IMa 9:18 Judas himself fell, and the remnant fled. 

IMa 9:19 Jonathan and Simon took up their brother Judas and buried him in his ancestral tomb at Modein. 

IMa 9:20 All Israel wept and mourned him deeply and for many days they repeated this dirge. 

1 Ma 9:21 “What a downfall for the strong man, the man who kept Israel safe!”. 

1 Ma 9:22 The other deeds of Judas, the battles he fought, the exploits he performed, and all his titles to 
greatness have not been recorded; but they were very many. 

1 Ma 9:23 After the death of Judas, the renegades came out of hiding throughout Israel and all the evil-doers 
reappeared. 

1 Ma 9:24 At that time there was a severe famine, and the country went over to their side. 

1 Ma 9:25 Bacchides deliberately chose the enemies of religion to administer the country. 

1 Ma 9:26 These traced and searched out the friends of Judas and brought them before Bacchides, who ill- 
treated and mocked them. 

1 Ma 9:27 A terrible oppression began in Israel; there had been nothing like it since the disappearance of 
prophecy among them. 

IMa 9:28 The friends of Judas then all united in saying to Jonathan, 

1 Ma 9:29 “Since your brother Judas died, there has been no one like him to head the resistance against our 
enemies, people like Bacchides and others who hate our nation. 

1 Ma 9:30 Accordingly, we have today chosen you to take his place as our ruler and leader and to fight our 
campaigns”. 

1 Ma 9:31 Whereupon, Jonathan took command, in succession to his brother Judas. 

IMa 9:32 Bacchides, when he heard the news, made plans to kill Jonathan. 

1 Ma 9:33 But this became known to Jonathan, his brother Simon and all his supporters, and they took refuge in 
the desert of Tekoa, camping by the water-supply at Asphar storage-well. 

1 Ma 9:34 (Bacchides came to know of this on the Sabbath day, and he too crossed the Jordan with his entire 
army.) 

IMa 9:35 Jonathan sent his brother, who was one of his commanders, to ask his friends the Nabataeans to 
store their considerable baggage for them. 

IMa 9:36 The sons of Amrai, however, those of Medeba, intercepted them, captured John and everything he 
had and made off with their prize. 

1 Ma 9:37 Later, Jonathan and his brother Simon were told that the sons of Amrai were celebrating an important 
wedding, and were escorting the bride, a daughter of one of the great notables of Canaan, from Nabata with a 
large retinue. 

1 Ma 9:38 Remembering the bloody end of their brother John, they went up and hid under cover of the mountain. 
1 Ma 9:39 As they were keeping watch, a noisy procession came into sight with a great deal of baggage, and the 
bridegroom, with his groomsmen and his family, came out to meet it with tambourines and a band, and rich, 
warlike display. 

IMa 9:40 The Jews rushed down on them from their ambush and killed them, inflicting heavy casualties; the 
survivors escaped to the mountain, leaving their entire baggage train to be captured. 

1 Ma 9:41 Thus, the wedding was turned into mourning and the music of their band into lamentation. 

1 Ma 9:42 Having in this way avenged in full the blood of their brother, they returned to the marshes of the 
Jordan. 



IMa 9:43 As soon as Bacchides heard this, he came on the Sabbath day with a considerable force to the steep 
banks of the Jordan. 

1 Ma 9:44 Jonathan said to his men, “Up! Let us fight for our lives, for today it is not as in the old days. 

1 Ma 9:45 You can see, we shall have to fight on our front and to our rear; we have the waters of the Jordan on 
one side, the marsh and scrub on the other, and we have no line of withdrawal. 

1 Ma 9:46 This is the moment to call on Heaven, to deliver you from the clutches of your enemies”. 

IMa 9:47 The engagement was begun by Jonathan, who aimed a blow at Bacchides, but the Syrian disengaged 
himself and withdrew, 

IMa 9:48 whereupon Jonathan and his men leapt into the Jordan and swam to the other bank; the enemy did 
not, however, cross the Jordan in pursuit. 

1 Ma 9:49 That day, Bacchides lost about a thousand men. 

1 Ma 9:50 Bacchides went back to Jerusalem and began fortifying some of the Judaean towns: the fortresses of 
Jericho, Emmaus, Beth-Horon, Bethel, Timnath, Pharathon and Tephon, with high walls and barred gates, 

1 Ma 9:51 and stationed a garrison in each of them to harass Israel. 

1 Ma 9:52 He also fortified the town of Beth-Zur, Gezer and the Citadel, and placed troops in them with supplies 
of provisions. 

1 Ma 9:53 He took the sons of the leading men of the country as hostages, and had them placed under guard in 
the Citadel of Jerusalem. 

1 Ma 9:54 In the year 1 53, in the second month, Alcimus ordered the demolition of the wall of the inner court of 
the sanctuary, destroying the work of the prophets. Alcimus had just begun the demolition 
IMa 9:55 when he suffered a stroke, and his work was interrupted. His mouth became obstructed, and his 
paralysis made him incapable of speaking at all or giving directions to his household; 

1 Ma 9:56 it was not long before he died in great agony. 

1 Ma 9:57 On the death of Alcimus, Bacchides went back to the king, and Judaea was left in peace for two 
years. 

IMa 9:58 The renegades then all agreed on a plan. “Now is the time”, they said, “while Jonathan and his 
supporters are living in peace and are full of confidence, for us to bring back Bacchides, and he will arrest the lot 
of them in one night”. 

1 Ma 9:59 So they went to him and reached an understanding. 

1 Ma 9:60 Bacchides at once set out with a large force, and sent secret instructions to all his allies in Judaea to 
seize Jonathan and his supporters. But they were unable to do this because their plan became known, 

1 Ma 9:61 and Jonathan and his men arrested some fifty of the men of the country who were ringleaders in the 
plot, and put them to death. 

1 Ma 9:62 Jonathan and Simon then retired with their partisans to Beth-Bassi in the desert; they rebuilt the 
ruinous parts of the place and fortified it. 

IMa 9:63 When Bacchides heard this, he mustered his whole force and notified his adherents in Judaea. 

IMa 9:64 He then proceeded to lay siege to Beth-Bassi, the fighting was protracted, and he constructed siege- 
engines. 

IMa 9:65 Jonathan, however, leaving his brother Simon in the town, broke out into the countryside with a 
handful of men. 

1 Ma 9:66 He launched a blow at Odomera and his brothers, and at the sons of Phasiron in their encampment; 
whereupon, these too came into the struggle, joining forces with him. 

1 Ma 9:67 Simon and his people, meanwhile, made a sortie from the town and set fire to the siege-engines. 

IMa 9:68 Taking the offensive against Bacchides, they defeated him. He was greatly disconcerted to find that 
his plan and his assault had come to nothing, 

1 Ma 9:69 and vented his anger on those renegades who had induced him to enter the country, putting many of 
them to death; he then decided to take his own troops home. 

1 Ma 9:70 Discovering this, Jonathan sent envoys to negotiate peace terms and the release of prisoners with 
him. 

1 Ma 9:71 Bacchides agreed to this, accepting his proposals and swearing never to seek occasion to harm him 
for the rest of his life. 

1 Ma 9:72 Having surrendered to Jonathan those prisoners he had earlier taken in Judaea, he turned about and 
withdrew to his own country, and never again came near their frontiers. 

IMa 9:73 The sword no longer hung over Israel, and Jonathan settled in Michmash, where he began to judge 
the people and to rid Israel of the godless. 

IMa 10:1 In the year 160, Alexander, son of Antiochus Epiphanes, raised an army and occupied Ptolemais. He 
was well received, and there inaugurated his reign. 

IMa 10:2 On hearing this, King Demetrius assembled a very large army and marched off to do battle with him. 
IMa 10:3 Demetrius furthermore sent Jonathan a most conciliatory letter, promising to promote him in rank, 



IMa 10:4 for, as he said, “We had better move first to come to terms with these people before he makes 
common cause with Alexander against us; 

IMa 10:5 he will not have forgotten all the wrongs we inflicted on him and his brothers, and on his nation”. 

IMa 10:6 He even authorised him to raise an army, to manufacture arms, and to describe himself as his ally, 
and ordered the hostages in the Citadel to be surrendered to him. 

1 Ma 1 0:7 Jonathan went straight to Jerusalem and read the letter in the hearing of the whole people and of the 
men in the Citadel. 

IMa 10:8 They were terrified when they heard that the king had given him authority to raise an army. 

IMa 10:9 The men in the Citadel surrendered the hostages to Jonathan, who handed them back to their 
parents. 

IMa 10:10 Jonathan then took up residence in Jerusalem and began the rebuilding and restoration of the city. 
IMa 10:1 1 He ordered those responsible for the work to build the walls and the defences round Mount Zion of 
squared stone blocks to make them stronger, and this was done. 

IMa 10:12 The foreigners in the fortresses built by Bacchides abandoned them, 

IMa 10:13 one after another leaving his post to go back to his own country. 

IMa 10:14 Only at Beth-Zur were a few left of those who had forsaken the Law and the precepts, since this was 
their refuge. 

IMa 10:15 King Alexander heard of all the promises Demetrius had sent to Jonathan, and he was also given an 
account of the battles and exploits of this man and his brothers and of the hardships they had endured. 

IMa 10:16 “Shall we ever find another man like him?”. he exclaimed. “We must make him our friend and ally!”. 

IMa 10:17 He therefore wrote him a letter, addressing him in these terms: 

IMa 10:18 “King Alexander to his brother Jonathan, greetings. 

IMa 10:19 “You have been brought to our notice as a strong man of action and as someöne who deserves to be 
our friend. 

1 Ma 1 0:20 Accordingly, we have today appointed you high priest of your nation, with the title of ‘Friend of the 
King’” — he also sent him a purple robe and a golden crown-'and you are to study our interests and maintain 
friendly relations with us”. 

IMa 10:21 Jonathan put on the sacred vestments in the seventh month of the year 160, on the feast of Shelters; 
he then set about raising troops and manufacturing arms in quantity. 

IMa 10:22 Demetrius was displeased when he heard what had happened. 

1 Ma 1 0:23 “What have we been doing”, he said, “for Alexander to forestall us in winning the friendship of the 
Jews and so improving his own position? 

IMa 10:24 I too shall address an appeal to them, offering them advancement and riches as an inducement to 
support me”. 

IMa 10:25 And he wrote to them as follows: “King Demetrius to the Jewish nation, greetings. 

1 Ma 1 0:26 “We have heard how you have kept your agreement with us and have maintained friendly relations 
with us and have not gone over to our enemies, and it has given us great satisfaction. 

1 Ma 1 0:27 If you now continue to keep faith with us, we shall make you a handsome return for what you do on 
our behalf. 

1 Ma 1 0:28 We shall accord you many exemptions and grant you privileges. 

IMa 10:29 “Henceforth I release you and exempt all the Jews from the tribute, the salt dues and the crown 
levies, 

1 Ma 1 0:30 and whereäs I am entitled to one-third of the grain and one-half of the fruit of the trees, I release from 
this levy, from today and for the future, Judaea and the three districts annexed to it from Samaria-Galilee, from 
this day henceforth in perpetuity. 

IMa 10:31 Jerusalem will be sacred and exempt, with its territory, from tithes and dues. 

1 Ma 1 0:32 I relinquish control of the Citadel in Jerusalem and make it over to the high priest, so that he may 
man it with a garrison of his own choosing. 

1 Ma 1 0:33 Every Jewish person taken from Judaea into captivity in any part of my kingdom I set free without 
ransom, and decree that all will be exempt from taxes, even on their livestock. 

IMa 10:34 All festivals, Sabbaths, New Moons and days of special observance, and the three days before and 
three days after a festival, will be days of exemption and quittance for all the Jews in my kingdom, 

1 Ma 1 0:35 and no one will have the right to exact payment from, or to molest, any of them for any matter 
whatsoever. 

1 Ma 1 0:36 “Jews will be enrolled in the king’s forces to the number of thirty thousand men and receive 
maintenance on the same scale as the rest of the king’s forces. 

IMa 10:37 Some of them will be stationed in the king’s major fortresses, and from among others appointments 
will be made to positions of trust in the kingdom. Their officers and commanders will be appointed from their own 
number and will live under their own laws, as the king has prescribed for Judaea. 



IMa 10:38 “As regards the three districts annexed to Judaea from the province of Samaria, these will be 
integrated into Judaea and considered as coming under one governor, obeying the high priest’s authority and no 
other. 

IMa 10:39 Ptolemais and the land thereto pertaining I present to the sanctuary in Jerusalem, to meet the 
necessary expenses of public worship. 

IMa 10:40 And I make a personal grant of fifteen thousand silver shekels annually chargeable to the royal 
revenue from appropriate places. 

IMa 10:41 And the entire surplus, which has not been paid in by the officials as in previous years, will 
henceforth be paid over by them for work on the Temple. 

1 Ma 1 0:42 In addition, the sum of five thousand silver shekels, levied annually on the profits of the sanctuary, as 
shown in the annual accounts, is also relinquished as the perquisite of the priests who perform the liturgy. 

IMa 10:43 Anyone who takes refuge in the Temple in Jerusalem or any of its precincts, when in debt to the 
royal exchequer or otherwise, will be discharged in full possession of all the goods he owns in my kingdom. 

1 Ma 1 0:44 As regards the building and restoration of the sanctuary, the expense of the work will be met from 
the royal exchequer. 

IMa 10:45 The reconstruction of the walls of Jerusalem and the fortification of the perimeter will also be a 
charge on the royal exchequer, as also the reconstruction of other city walls in Judaea”. 

IMa 10:46 When Jonathan and the people heard these proposals, they put no faith in them and refused to 
accept them, remembering what great wrongs Demetrius had done to Israel and how cruelly he had oppressed 
them. 

IMa 10:47 They decided in favour of Alexander, since he seemed to offer the better inducements of the two, 
and they became his constant allies. 

IMa 10:48 King Alexander now mustered large forces and advanced against Demetrius. 

IMa 10:49 The two kings met in battle. Alexander’s army was routed, and Demetrius pursued him and defeated 
his troops. 

IMa 10:50 He continued the battle with vigour until sunset. Demetrius himself, however, was killed the same 
day. 

IMa 10:51 Alexander sent ambassadors to Ptolemy king of Egypt, with this message: 

IMa 10:52 “Since I have returned to my kingdom, have ascended the throne of my ancestors, have gained 
control by crushing Demetrius, and so recovered our country- 

IMa 10:53 for I fought him and we crushed both him and his army, and I now occupy his royal throne- 

1 Ma 1 0:54 let us now make a treaty of friendship. Give me your daughter in marriage: as your son-in-law, I shall 

give you, and her, presents which are worthy of you”. 

IMa 10:55 King Ptolemy replied as follows: “Happy the day when you returned to the land of your ancestors and 
ascended their royal throne! 

1 Ma 1 0:56 I shall at once do for you what your letter proposes; but meet me at Ptolemais, so that we can see 
one another, and I shall become your father-in-law, as you have asked”. 

IMa 10:57 Ptolemy left Egypt with his daughter Cleopatra and reached Ptolemais in the year 162. 

1 Ma 1 0:58 King Alexander went to meet him, and Ptolemy gave him the hand of his daughter Cleopatra and 

celebrated her wedding in Ptolemais with great magnificence, as kings do. 

1 Ma 1 0:59 King Alexander then wrote to Jonathan to come and meet him. 

1 Ma 1 0:60 Jonathan made his way in state to Ptolemais and met the two kings; he gave them and their friends 
silver and gold, and many gifts, and made a favourable impression on them. 

1 Ma 1 0:61 A number of scoundrels, the pest of Israel, combined to denounce him, but the king paid no attention 
to them. 

IMa 10:62 In fact, the king commanded that Jonathan should be divested of his own garments and clothed in 
the purple, which was done. 

IMa 10:63 The king then seated him by his side and said to his officers, “Escort him into the centre of the city 
and proclaim that no one is to bring charges against him on any count; no one is to molest him for any reason”. 
IMa 10:64 And so, when his accusers saw the honour done him by this proclamation, and Jonathan himself 
invested in the purple, they all fled. 

1 Ma 1 0:65 The king did him the honour of enrolling him among the First Friends, and appointed him 
commander-in-chief and governor-general. 

IMa 10:66 Jonathan then returned to Jerusalem in peace and gladness. 

IMa 10:67 In the year 165, Demetrius son of Demetrius came from Crete to the land of his ancestors. 

1 Ma 1 0:68 When King Alexander heard of it he was plunged into gloom, and retired to Antioch. 

1 Ma 1 0:69 Demetrius confirmed Apollonius as governor of Coele-Syria; the latter assembled a large force, 
encamped at Jamnia and sent the following message to Jonathan the high priest: 

1 Ma 1 0:70 “You are entirely alone in rising against us, and now I find myself ridiculed and reproached on your 



account. Why do you use your authority to our disadvantage in the mountains? 

IMa 10:71 If you are so confident in your forces, come down now to meet us on the plain and let us take each 
other’s measure there; on my side I have the strength of the towns. 

1 Ma 1 0:72 Ask and learn who I am and who the others supporting us are. You will hear that you cannot stand 
up to us, since your ancestors were twice routed on their own ground, 

1 Ma 1 0:73 nor will you now be able to withstand the cavalry or so great an army on the plain, where there is 
neither rock, nor stone, nor refuge of any kind”. 

IMa 10:74 On hearing Apollonius’ words, Jonathan’s spirit was roused; he picked ten thousand men and left 
Jerusalem, and his brother Simon joined him with reinforcements. 

IMa 10:75 He drew up his forces outside Joppa, the citizens having shut him out, since Apollonius had a 
garrison in Joppa. When they began the attack, 

1 Ma 1 0:76 the citizens took fright and opened the gates, and Jonathan occupied Joppa. 

1 Ma 1 0:77 Hearing this, Apollonius marshalled three thousand cavalry and a large army and made his way to 
Azotus as though intending to march through, while in fact pressing on into the plain, since he had a great 
number of cavalry on which he was relying. 

1 Ma 1 0:78 Jonathan pursued him as far as Azotus, where the armies joined battle. 

1 Ma 1 0:79 Now, Apollonius had left a thousand horsemen in concealment behind them. 

IMa 10:80 Jonathan knew of this enemy position behind him; the horsemen surrounded his army, firing their 
arrows into his men from morning till evening. 

IMa 10:81 But the troops stood firm, as Jonathan had ordered. Once the cavalry was exhausted, 

1 Ma 1 0:82 Simon sent his own troops into attack against the phalanx, which he cut to pieces and routed. 

IMa 10:83 The cavalry scattered over the plain and fled to Azotus, where they took sanctuary in Beth-Dagon, 
the temple of their idol. 

IMa 10:84 Jonathan, however, set fire to Azotus and the surrounding towns, plundered them, and burned down 
the temple of Dagon, with all the fugitives who had crowded into it. 

1 Ma 1 0:85 The enemy losses, counting those who fell by the sword and those burnt to death, totalled about 
eight thousand men. 

IMa 10:86 Jonathan then left and pitched camp outside Ascalon, where the citizens came out to meet him with 
great ceremony. 

IMa 10:87 Jonathan then returned to Jerusalem with his followers, laden with booty. 

IMa 10:88 In the event, when King Alexander heard what had happened, he awarded Jonathan further 
honours: 

IMa 10:89 he sent him the golden brooch, of the kind customarily presented to the King’s Cousins, and gave 
him proprietary rights over Ekron and the land adjoining it. 

IMa 11:1 The king of Egypt then assembled an army as numerous as the sands of the seashore, with many 
ships, and set out to take possession of Alexander’s kingdom by a ruse and add it to his own kingdom. 

1 Ma 1 1 :2 He set off for Syria with protestations of peace, and the people of the towns opened their gates to him 
and came out to meet him, since King Alexander’s orders were to welcome him, Ptolemy being his father-in-law. 
1 Ma 1 1 :3 On entering the towns, however, Ptolemy quartered troops as a garrison in each one. 

IMa 1 1 :4 When he reached Azotus he was shown the burnt-out temple of Dagon, with Azotus and its suburbs 
in ruins, corpses scattered here and there, and the charred remains of those whom Jonathan had burnt to death 
in the battle, piled into heaps along his route. 

IMa 1 1 :5 They explained to the king what Jonathan had done, hoping for his disapproval; but the king said 
nothing. 

IMa 11:6 Jonathan went in state to meet the king at Joppa, where they greeted each other and spent the night. 
IMa 1 1 :7 Jonathan accompanied the king as far as the river called Eleutherus, and then returned to Jerusalem. 
IMa 11:8 King Ptolemy for his part occupied the coastal towns as far as Seleucia on the coast, all the while 
maturing his wicked designs against Alexander. 

1 Ma 1 1 :9 He sent envoys to King Demetrius to say, “Come and let us make a treaty; I shall give you my 
daughter, whom Alexander now has, and you shall rule your father’s kingdom. 

IMa 1 1:10 I regret having given my daughter to that man, since he has tried to kill me”. 

1 Ma 11:11 He made this accusation because he coveted his kingdom. 

IMa 11:12 Having carried off his daughter and bestowed her on Demetrius, he broke with Alexander, and their 
enmity became open. 

IMa 11:13 Ptolemy next entered Antioch and assumed the crown of Asia; he now wore on his head the two 
crowns of Egypt and Asia. 

IMa 11:14 King Alexander was in Cilicia at the time, since the people of those parts had risen in revolt, 

IMa 11:15 but when he heard the news, he advanced on his rival to give battle, while Ptolemy for his part also 
took the field, met him with a strong force and routed him. 



IMa 11:16 Alexander fled to Arabia for refuge, and King Ptolemy reigned supreme. 

IMa 11:17 Zabdiel the Arab cut off Alexander’s head and sent it to Ptolemy. 

IMa 11:18 Three days later King Ptolemy died, and the Egyptian garrisons in the strongholds were killed by the 
local inhabitants. 

IMa 11:19 So Demetrius became king in the year 167. 

1 Ma 1 1 :20 At the same time, Jonathan mustered the men of Judaea for an assault on the Citadel of Jerusalem, 
and they set up numerous siege-engines against it. 

IMa 1 1 :21 But some renegades who hated their nation made their way to the king and told him that Jonathan 
was besieging the Citadel. 

1 Ma 1 1 :22 The king was angered by the news. No sooner had he been informed than he set out and came to 
Ptolemais. He wrote to Jonathan, telling him to raise the siege and to meet him for a conference in Ptolemais as 
soon as possible. 

1 Ma 1 1 :23 When Jonathan heard this, he gave orders for the siege to continue; he then selected a deputation 
from the elders of Israel and the priests, and took the deliberate risk 

1 Ma 1 1 :24 of himself taking silver and gold, clothing and numerous other presents, and going to Ptolemais to 
face the king, whose favour he succeeded in winning; 

1 Ma 1 1 :25 and although one or two renegades of his nation brought charges against him, 

IMa 11:26 the king treated him as his predecessors had treated him, and promoted him in the presence of all 
his friends. 

1 Ma 1 1 :27 He confirmed him in the high-priesthood and whatever other distinctions he already held, and had 
him ranked among the First Friends. 

1 Ma 1 1 :28 Jonathan asked the king to exempt Judaea and the three Samaritan districts from taxation, 
promising him three hundred talents in return. 

1 Ma 1 1 :29 The king consented, and wrote Jonathan a rescript covering the whole matter, in these terms: 

1 Ma 1 1 :30 “King Demetrius to Jonathan his brother, and to the Jewish nation, greetings. 

1 Ma 1 1 :31 “We have written to Lasthenes our cousin concerning you, and now send you this copy of our 
rescript for your own information: 

1 Ma 1 1 :32 ‘King Demetrius to his father Lasthenes, greetings. 

1 Ma 1 1 :33 ‘The nation of the Jews is our ally; they fulfil their obligations to us, and in view of their goodwill 
towards us we have decided to show them our bounty. 

1 Ma 1 1 :34 We confirm them in their possession of the territory of Judaea and the three districts of Aphairema, 
Lydda and Ramathaim; these were annexed to Judaea from Samaritan territory, with all their dependencies, in 
favour of all who offer sacrifice in Jerusalem, instead of the royal dues which the king formerly received from 
them every year, from the yield of the soil and the fruit crops. 

1 Ma 1 1 :35 As regards our other rights over the tithes and taxes due to us, over the salt marshes, and the crown 
taxes due to us, as from today we release them from them all. 

1 Ma 1 1 :36 None of these grants will be revoked henceforth or anywhere. 

1 Ma 1 1 :37 You will make yourself responsible for having a copy of this made, to be given to Jonathan and 
displayed on the holy mountain in a conspicuous place’”. 

1 Ma 1 1 :38 When King Demetrius saw that the country was at peace under his rule and that no resistance was 
offered him, he dismissed his forces, and sent all the men home, except for the foreign troops that he had 
recruited in the foreign island, thus incurring the enmity of the veterans who had served his ancestors. 

IMa 1 1 :39 Now Trypho, one of Alexander’s former supporters, noting that all the troops were muttering against 
Demetrius, went to see lamleku, the Arab who was bringing up Antiochus, Alexander’s young son, 

1 Ma 1 1 :40 and repeatedly urged him to let him have the boy, so that he might succeed his father as king; he 
told him of Demetrius’ decision and of the resentment it had aroused among his troops. He spent a long time 
there. 

1 Ma 1 1 :41 Jonathan, meanwhile, sent to ask King Demetrius to withdraw the garrisons from the Citadel in 
Jerusalem and from the other fortresses, since they were constantly fighting Israel. 

1 Ma 1 1 :42 Demetrius sent word back to Jonathan, “Not only will I do this for you and for your nation, but I shall 
heap honours on you and your nation if I find a favourable opportunity. 

1 Ma 1 1 :43 For the present, you would do well to send me reinforcements, since all my troops have deserted”. 

1 Ma 1 1 :44 Jonathan sent three thousand experienced soldiers to him in Antioch; when they reached the king, 
he was delighted at their arrival. 

1 Ma 1 1 :45 The citizens crowded together in the centre of the city, to the number of some hundred and twenty 
thousand, intending to kill the king. 

1 Ma 1 1 :46 The king took refuge in the palace, while the citizens occupied the thoroughfares of the city and 
began to attack. 

1 Ma 1 1 :47 The king then called on the Jews for help; and these all rallied round him, then fanned out through 



the city, and that day killed about a hundred thousand of its inhabitants. 

1 Ma 1 1 :48 They fired the city, seizing a great deal of plunder at the same time, and secured the king’s safety. 

1 Ma 1 1 :49 When the citizens saw that the Jews had the city at their mercy, their courage failed them, and they 
made an abject appeal to the king, 

1 Ma 1 1 :50 “Give us the right hand of peace, and let the Jews stop their fight against us and the city”. 

1 Ma 1 1 :51 They threw down their arms and made peace. The Jews were covered in glory, in the eyes of the 
king and of everyone else in his kingdom. Having won renown in his kingdom, they returned to Jerusalem laden 
with booty. 

1 Ma 1 1 :52 Thus, King Demetrius sat all the more securely on his royal throne, and the country was quiet under 
his government. 

1 Ma 1 1 :53 But he gave the lie to all the promises he had made, and changed his attitude to Jonathan, giving 
nothing in return for the services Jonathan had rendered him, but thwarting him at every turn. 

IMa 11:54 After this, Trypho came back with the little boy Antiochus, who became king and was crowned. 

1 Ma 1 1 :55 All the troops that Demetrius had summarily dismissed rallied to Antiochus, and made war on 
Demetrius, who turned tail and fled. 

1 Ma 1 1 :56 Trypho captured the elephants and seized Antioch. 

1 Ma 1 1 :57 Young Antiochus then wrote as follows to Jonathan: “I confirm you in the high-priesthood and set you 
over the four districts and appoint you one of the Friends of the King”. 

1 Ma 1 1 :58 He sent him a service of gold plate, and granted him the right to drink from gold vessels, and to wear 
the purple and the golden brooch. 

1 Ma 1 1 :59 He appointed his brother Simon commander-in-chief of the region from the Ladder of Tyre to the 
frontiers of Egypt. 

1 Ma 1 1 :60 Jonathan then set out and made a progress through Transeuphrates and its towns, and the entire 
Syrian army rallied to his support. He came to Ascalon and was received in state by the inhabitants. 

1 Ma 1 1 :61 From there he proceeded to Gaza, but the people of Gaza shut him out, so he laid siege to it, 
burning down its suburbs and plundering them. 

1 Ma 1 1 :62 The people of Gaza then pleaded with Jonathan, and he made peace with them; but he took the 
sons of their chief men as hostages and sent them away to Jerusalem. He then travelled through the country as 
far as Damascus. 

1 Ma 1 1 :63 Jonathan now learned that Demetrius’ generals had arrived at Kadesh in Galilee with a large army, 
intending to remove him from office, 

1 Ma 1 1 :64 and went to engage them, leaving his brother Simon inside the country. 

1 Ma 1 1 :65 Simon laid siege to Beth-Zur, attacking it day after day, and blockading the inhabitants 
1 Ma 1 1 :66 till they sued for peace, which he granted them, though he expelled them from the town and 
occupied it, stationing a garrison there. 

1 Ma 1 1 :67 Jonathan and his army, meanwhile, having pitched camp by the Lake of Gennesar, rose early, and 
by morning were already in the plain of Hazor. 

1 Ma 1 1 :68 The foreigners’ army advanced to fight them on the plain, having first positioned an ambush for him 
in the mountains. While the main body was advancing directly towards the Jews, 

1 Ma 1 1 :69 the troops in ambush broke cover and attacked first. 

1 Ma 1 1 :70 All the men with Jonathan fled; no one was left, except Mattathias son of Absalom and Judas son of 
Chalphi, the generals of his army. 

IMa 1 1:71 At this, Jonathan tore his garments, put dust on his head, and prayed. 

1 Ma 1 1 :72 Then he returned to the fight and routed the enemy, who fled. 

1 Ma 1 1 :73 When the fugitives from his own forces saw this, they came back to him and joined in the pursuit as 
far as Kadesh where the enemy encampment was, and there they themselves pitched camp. 

1 Ma 1 1 :74 About three thousand of the foreign troops fell that day. Jonathan then returned to Jerusalem. 

IMa 12:1 When Jonathan saw that circumstances were working in his favour, he sent a select mission to Rome 
to confirm and renew his treaty of friendship with the Romans. 

IMa 12:2 He also sent letters to the same effect to the Spartans and to other places. 

IMa 12:3 The envoys made their way to Rome, entered the Senate and said, “Jonathan the high priest and the 
Jewish nation have sent us to renew your treaty of friendship and alliance with them as before”. 

IMa 12:4 The Senate gave them letters to the authorities of each place, to procure their safe conduct to 
Judaea. 

IMa 12:5 The following is the copy of the letter Jonathan wrote to the Spartans: 

IMa 12:6 “Jonathan the high priest, the senate of the nation, the priests and the rest of the Jewish people to the 
Spartans their brothers, greetings. 

1 Ma 1 2:7 “In the past, a letter was sent to Onias, the high priest, from Areios, one of your kings, stating that you 
are indeed our brothers, as the copy subjoined attests. 



IMa 12:8 Onias received the envoy with honour, and accepted the letter, in which a clear declaration was made 
of friendship and alliance. 

IMa 12:9 For our part, though we have no need of these, having the consolation of the holy books in our 
possession, 

IMa 12:10 we venture to send to renew ourfraternal friendship with you, so that we may not become strangers 
to you, a long time having elapsed since you last wrote to us. 

IMa 12:11 We, for our part, on every occasion, at our festivals and on other appointed days, unfailingly 
remember you in the sacrifices we offer and in our prayers, as it is right and fitting to remember brothers. 

IMa 12:12 We rejoice in your renown. 

IMa 12:13 “We ourselves, however, have had many trials and many wars, the neighbouring kings making war 
on us. 

IMa 12:14 We were unwilling to trouble you or our other allies and friends during these wars, 

IMa 12:15 since we have the support of Heaven to help us, thanks to which we have been delivered from our 
enemies, and they are the ones who have been brought low. 

IMa 12:16 We have therefore chosen Numenius son of Antiochus, and Antipater son of Jason, and sent them 
to the Romans to renew our former treaty of friendship and alliance, 

IMa 12:17 and we have ordered them also to visit you, to greet you and deliver you this letter of ours 
concerning the renewal of our brotherhood; 

IMa 12:18 we shall be grateful for an answer to it”. 

IMa 12:19 The following is the copy of the letter sent to Onias: 

IMa 12:20 “Areios king of the Spartans, to Onias the high priest, greetings. 

IMa 12:21 “It has been discovered in records regarding the Spartans and Jews that they are brothers, and of 
the race of Abraham. 

1 Ma 1 2:22 Now that this has come to our knowledge, we shall be obliged if you will send us news of your 
welfare. 

IMa 12:23 Our own message to you is this: your flocks and your possessions are ours, and ours are yours, and 
we are instructing our envoys to give you a message to this effect”. 

IMa 12:24 Jonathan learned that Demetrius’ generals had returned with a larger army than before to make war 
on him. 

IMa 12:25 He therefore left Jerusalem and went to engage them in the area of Hamath, not giving them the 
time to invade his own territory. 

1 Ma 12:26 He sent spies into their camp, who told him on their return that the enemy were taking up positions 
for a night attack on the Jews. 

1 Ma 12:27 At sunset, Jonathan ordered his men to keep watch with their weapons at hand, in readiness to fight 
at any time during the night, and posted advance guards all round the camp. 

IMa 12:28 On learning that Jonathan and his men were ready to fight, the enemy took fright and, with quaking 
hearts, lit fires in their bivouac and decamped. 

IMa 12:29 Jonathan and his men, watching the glow of the fires, were unaware of their withdrawal until 
morning, 

IMa 12:30 and although Jonathan pursued them, he failed to overtake them, for they had already crossed the 
river Eleutherus. 

IMa 12:31 So Jonathan wheeled round on the Arabs called Zabadaeans, beat them and plundered them; 

IMa 12:32 then, breaking camp, he went to Damascus, thus crossing the whole province. 

IMa 12:33 Simon, meanwhile, had also set out and had penetrated as far as Ascalon and the neighbouring 
towns. He then turned on Joppa and moved quickly to occupy it, 

IMa 1 2:34 for he had heard of their intention to hand over this strong point to the supporters of Demetrius; he 
stationed a garrison there to hold it. 

IMa 12:35 Jonathan, on his return, called a meeting of the elders of the people and decided with them to build 
fortresses in Judaea 

IMa 12:36 and to heighten the walls of Jerusalem and erect a high barrier between the Citadel and the city, to 
cut the former off from the city and isolate it, to prevent the occupants from buying or selling. 

IMa 12:37 Rebuilding the city was a co-operative effort: part of the wall over the eastern ravine had fallen down; 
he restored the quarter called Chaphenatha. 

IMa 12:38 Simon, meanwhile, rebuilt Adida in the lowlands, fortifying it, and erecting gates with bolts. 

IMa 12:39 Trypho’s ambition was to become king of Asia, assume the crown, and overpower King Antiochus. 

1 Ma 1 2:40 He was apprehensive that Jonathan might not allow him to do this, and might even make war on 
him, so he set out and came to Beth-Shean, in the hopes of finding some pretext for having him arrested and put 
to death. 

IMa 12:41 Jonathan went out to intercept him, with forty thousand picked men in battle order, and arrived at 



Beth-Shean. 

IMa 12:42 When Trypho saw him there with a large force, he hesitated to make any move against him. 

IMa 12:43 He even received him with honour, commended him to all his friends, gave him presents and 
ordered his friends and his troops to obey him as they would himself. 

IMa 12:44 He said to Jonathan, “Why have you given all these people so much trouble, when there is no threat 
of war between us? 

1 Ma 1 2:45 Send them back home; pick yourself a few men as your bodyguard, and come with me to Ptolemais, 
which I am going to hand over to you, with the other fortresses and the remaining troops and all the officials; 
after which, I shall take the road for home. This was my purpose in coming here”. 

IMa 12:46 Jonathan trusted him and did as he said; he dismissed his forces, who went back to Judaea. 

IMa 12:47 With him he retained three thousand men, of whom he left two thousand in Galilee, while a thousand 
accompanied him. 

IMa 12:48 But as soon as Jonathan had entered Ptolemais, the people of Ptolemais closed the gates, seized 
him, and put all those who had entered with him to the sword. 

IMa 12:49 Trypho sent troops and cavalry into Galilee and the Great Plain to destroy all Jonathan’s supporters. 
IMa 12:50 These, concluding that he had been taken and had perished with his companions, encouraged one 
another, marching with closed ranks and ready to give battle, 

IMa 12:51 and when their pursuers saw that they would fight for their lives, they turned back. 

IMa 12:52 All reached Judaea safe and sound, and there they lamented Jonathan and his companions, being 
very frightened indeed; all Israel was plunged into mourning. 

IMa 12:53 The surrounding nations were all now looking for ways of destroying them: “They have no leader”, 
they said, “no ally; we have only to attack them now, and we shall blot out their very memory from all peoples”. 
IMa 13:1 Simon heard that Trypho had collected a large army to invade and devastate Judaea, 

1 Ma 1 3:2 and when he saw how the people were quaking with fear, he went up to Jerusalem, called the people 

together, 

1 Ma 1 3:3 and exhorted them thus, “You know yourselves how much I and my brothers and my father’s family 
have done for the laws and the sanctuary; you know what wars and hardships we have experienced. 

IMa 13:4 That is why my brothers are all dead, for Israel’s sake, and I am the only one left. 

1 Ma 1 3:5 Far be it from me, then, to be sparing of my own life in any time of oppression, for I am not worth more 

than my brothers. 

1 Ma 1 3:6 Rather will I avenge my nation and the sanctuary and your wives and children, now that the foreigners 
are all united in malice to destroy us”. 

1 Ma 1 3:7 The people’s spirit rekindled as they listened to his words, 

1 Ma 1 3:8 and they shouted back at him, “You are our leader in place of Judas and your brother Jonathan. 

1 Ma 1 3:9 Fight our battles for us, and we will do whatever you tell us”. 

IMa 13:10 So he assembled all the fighting men and hurried on with completing the walls of Jerusalem, 
fortifying the whole perimeter. 

IMa 13:1 1 He sent a considerable force to Joppa under Jonathan son of Absalom who drove out the inhabitants 
and remained there in occupation. 

IMa 13:12 Trypho now left Ptolemais with a large army to invade Judaea, taking Jonathan with him under 
guard. 

IMa 13:13 Simon pitched camp in Adida, facing the plain. 

IMa 13:14 When Trypho learned that Simon had taken the place of his brother Jonathan and that he intended 
to join battle with him, he sent envoys to him with this message, 

IMa 13:15 “Your brother Jonathan was in debt to the royal exchequer for the offices he held; that is why we are 
detaining him. 

IMa 13:16 If you send a hundred talents of silver and two of his sons as hostages, to make sure that on his 
release he does not revolt against us, we shall release him”. 

IMa 13:17 Although Simon was aware that the message was a ruse, he sent for the money and the boys for 
fear of incurring great hostility from the people, 

IMa 13:18 who would have said that Jonathan had died because Simon would not send Trypho the money and 
the children. 

IMa 13:19 He therefore sent both the boys and the hundred talents, but Trypho broke his word and did not 
release Jonathan. 

1 Ma 1 3:20 Next, T rypho set about the invasion and devastation of the country; he made a detour along the 
Adora road, but Simon and his army confronted him wherever he attempted to go. 

IMa 13:21 The men in the Citadel kept sending messengers to Trypho, urging him to get through to them by 
way of the desert and send them supplies. 

IMa 13:22 Trypho organised his entire cavalry to go, but that night it snowed so heavily that he could not get 



through for the snow, so he left there and moved off into Gilead. 

IMa 13:23 As he approached Baskama he killed Jonathan, who was buried there. 

IMa 13:24 Trypho turned back and regained his own country. 

1 Ma 1 3:25 Simon sent and recovered the bones of his brother Jonathan, and buried him in Modein, the town of 
his ancestors. 

IMa 13:26 All Israel kept solemn mourning for him and long bewailed him. 

1 Ma 1 3:27 Over the tomb of his father and brothers, Simon raised a monument high enough to catch the eye, 
using dressed stone back and front. 

IMa 13:28 He erected seven pyramids facing each other, for his father and mother and his four brothers, 

IMa 13:29 surrounding them with a structure consisting of tall columns surmounted by trophies of arms to their 
everlasting memory and, beside the trophies of arms, ships sculpted on a scale to be seen by all who sail the 
sea. 

IMa 13:30 Such was the monument he constructed at Modein, and it is still there today. 

IMa 13:31 Now Trypho, betraying the trust of young King Antiochus, put him to death. 

1 Ma 1 3:32 He usurped his throne, assuming the crown of Asia, and brought great havoc on the country. 

1 Ma 1 3:33 Simon built up the fortresses of Judaea, surrounding them with high towers, great walls and gates 
with bolts, and stocked these fortresses with food. 

1 Ma 1 3:34 He also sent a delegation to King Demetrius, to get him to grant the province a remission, since all 
Trypho did was to despoil. 

IMa 13:35 King Demetrius replied to his request in a letter framed as follows: 

1 Ma 1 3:36 “King Demetrius to Simon, high priest and Friend of Kings, and to the elders and nation of the Jews, 
greetings. 

IMa 13:37 “It has pleased us to accept the golden crown and the palm you have sent us, and we are disposed 
to make a general peace with you, and to write to the officials to grant you remissions. 

IMa 13:38 Everything that we have decreed concerning you remains in force, and the fortresses you have built 
may remain in your hands. 

IMa 13:39 We pardon all offences, unwitting or intentional, hitherto committed, and remit the crown tax you now 
owe us; and whatever other taxes were levied in Jerusalem are no longer to be levied. 

1 Ma 1 3:40 If any of you are suitable for enrolment in our bodyguard, let them be enrolled, and let there be 
peace between us”. 

IMa 13:41 The gentile yoke was thus lifted from Israel in the year 170, 

1 Ma 1 3:42 when our people began engrossing their documents and contracts: “In the first year of Simon, 
eminent high priest, commander-in-chief and ethnarch of the Jews”. 

1 Ma 1 3:43 About that time Simon laid siege to Gezer, surrounding it with his troops. He constructed a mobile 
tower, brought it up to the city, opened a breach in one of the bastions and took it. 

IMa 13:44 The men in the mobile tower sprang out into the city, where great confusion ensued. 

1 Ma 1 3:45 The citizens, accompanied by their wives and children, mounted the ramparts with their garments 
torn and loudly implored Simon to make peace with them: 

IMa 13:46 “Treat us”, they said, “not as our wickedness deserves, but as your mercy prompts you”. 

IMa 13:47 Simon came to terms with them and stopped the fighting; but he expelled them from the city, purified 
the houses which contained idols, and then made his entry with songs of praise. 

IMa 13:48 He banished all impurity from it, settled in it people who observed the Law, and having fortified it, 
built a residence there for himself. 

IMa 13:49 The occupants of the Citadel in Jerusalem, prevented as they were from coming out and going into 
the countryside to buy and sell, were in desperate need of food, and numbers of them were being carried off by 
starvation. 

IMa 13:50 They begged Simon to make peace with them, and he granted this, though he expelled them and 
purified the Citadel from its pollutions. 

IMa 13:51 The Jews made their entry on the twenty-third day of the second month in the year 171, with 
acclamations and carrying palms, to the sound of lyres, cymbals and harps, chanting hymns and canticles, since 
a great enemy had been crushed and thrown out of Israel. Simon made it a day of annual rejoicing. 

IMa 13:52 He fortified the Temple hill on the Citadel side, and took up residence there with his men. 

IMa 13:53 Since his son John had come to manhood, Simon appointed him general-in-chief, with his residence 
in Gezer. 

IMa 14:1 In the year 172, King Demetrius assembled his forces and marched into Media to raise help for the 
fight against Trypho. 

IMa 14:2 When Arsaces king of Persia and Media heard that Demetrius had entered his territory, he sent one of 
his generals to capture him alive. 

IMa 14:3 The general defeated the army of Demetrius, seized him and brought him to Arsaces, who imprisoned 



him. 

IMa 14:4 The country was at peace throughout the days of Simon. He sought the good of his nation and they 
were well pleased with his authority, as with his magnificence, throughout his life. 

IMa 14:5 To crown his titles to glory, he took Joppa and made it a harbour, gaining access to the Mediterranean 
Isles. 

IMa 14:6 He enlarged the frontiers of his nation, keeping his mastery over the homeland, 

IMa 14:7 resettling a host of captives. He conquered Gezer, Beth-Zur and the Citadel, ridding them of every 
impurity, and no one could resist him. 

IMa 14:8 The people farmed their land in peace; the land gave its produce, the trees of the plain their fruit. 

IMa 14:9 The elders sat at ease in the squares, all their talk was of their prosperity; the young men wore 
splendid armour. 

IMa 14:10 He kept the towns supplied with provisions and furnished with fortifications, until his fame resounded 
to the ends of the earth. 

IMa 14:1 1 He established peace in the land, and Israel knew great joy. 

IMa 14:12 Each man sat under his own vine and his own fig tree, and there was no one to make them afraid. 
IMa 14:13 No enemy was left in the land to fight them, the very kings of those times had been crushed. 

IMa 14:14 He encouraged the afflicted members of his people, suppressing every wicked man and renegade. 
He strove to observe the Law, 

IMa 14:15 and gave new splendour to the Temple, enriching it with many sacred vessels. 

IMa 14:16 When it became known in Rome and as far as Sparta that Jonathan was dead, people were deeply 
grieved. 

IMa 14:17 But as soon as they heard that his brother Simon had succeeded him as high priest and was master 
of the country and the cities in it, 

IMa 14:18 they wrote to him on bronze tablets to renew the treaty of friendship and alliance which they had 
made with his brothers, Judas and Jonathan, 

IMa 14:19 and the document was read out before the assembly in Jerusalem. 

1 Ma 14:20 This is the copy of the letter sent by the Spartans: “The rulers and the city of Sparta, to Simon the 
high priest and to the elders and priests and the rest of the people of the Jews, greetings. 

IMa 14:21 “The ambassadors whom you sent to our people have informed us of your glory and prosperity, and 
we are delighted with their visit. 

IMa 14:22 We have recorded their declarations in the minutes of our public assemblies, as follows, ‘Numenius 
son of Antiochus, and Antipater son of Jason, ambassadors of the Jews, came to us to renew their friendship 
with us. 

1 Ma 14:23 And it was the people’s pleasure to receive these personages with honour and to deposit a copy of 
their statements in the public archives, so that the people of Sparta might preserve a record of them. A copy was 
also made for Simon the high priest’”. 

IMa 14:24 After this, Simon sent Numenius to Rome as the bearer of a large golden shield weighing a thousand 
mina, to confirm the alliance with them. 

IMa 14:25 When these events were reported to our people, they said, “What mark of appreciation shall we give 
to Simon and his sons? 

IMa 14:26 He stood firm, he and his brothers and his father’s house: he fought off the enemies of Israel and 
secured its freedom”. So they recorded an inscription on bronze tablets and set it up on pillars on Mount Zion. 

1 Ma 14:27 This is a copy of the text: “The eighteenth of Elul, in the year 1 72, being the third year of Simon, 
eminent high priest: 

IMa 14:28 “In Asaramel, in the Grand Assembly of priests and people, of princes of the nation and of elders of 
the country: “We are acquainted with the matters following: 

IMa 14:29 “When there was almost incessant fighting in the country Simon, son of Mattathias, a priest of the 
line of Joarib, and his brothers courted danger and withstood their nation’s enemies to safeguard the integrity of 
their sanctuary and of the Law, and so brought their nation great glory; 

IMa 14:30 “For when, Jonathan having rallied his nation and become its high priest and having then been 
gathered to his ancestors, 

IMa 14:31 the enemy planned to invade the country, intending to devastate their territory and to lay hands on 
their sanctuary, 

IMa 14:32 Simon next came forward to fight for his nation: spending much of his personal wealth on arming his 
nation’s fighting men and on providing their pay; 

1 Ma 14:33 fortifying the towns of Judaea, as well as Beth-Zur on the Judaean frontier where the enemy arsenal 
had formerly been, and stationing in it a garrison of Jewish soldiers; 

1 Ma 14:34 fortifying Joppa on the coast, and Gezer on the borders of Azotus, a place formerly inhabited by the 
enemy, founding a Jewish colony there, and providing the settlers with everything they needed to set them on 



their feet; 

IMa 14:35 “In consequence of which, the people, aware of Simon’s loyalty and of the glory which he was 
determined to win for his nation, have made him their ethnarch and high priest, for all his services and for the 
integrity and loyalty which he has shown towards his nation, and for having by every means sought to enhance 
his people’s power; 

1 Ma 1 4:36 “It has fallen to him in his time to expel the foreigners from his country, including those in the City of 
David in Jerusalem, who had converted it into a citadel for their own use, from which they would sally out to 
defile the surroundings of the sanctuary and to violate its sacred character; 

IMa 14:37 to station Jewish soldiers there instead for the security of the country and the city; and to heighten 
the walls of Jerusalem; 

IMa 1 4:38 “And since King Demetrius has heard that the Romans call the Jews their friends, allies and brothers, 
IMa 14:39 and that they have given an honourable reception to Simon’s ambassadors, and, furthermore, 

1 Ma 14:40 that the Jews and priests are happy that Simon should, pending the advent of a genuine prophet, be 
their ethnarch and high priest for life 

IMa 14:41 therefore he has confirmed him in the high-priestly office, has raised him to the rank of Friend and 
has showered great honours on him, also confirming him as their commander-in-chief, 

1 Ma 1 4:42 with the right to appoint officials to oversee the fabric of the sanctuary and to administer the country, 
munitions and fortresses; 

IMa 14:43 he is to have personal charge of the sanctuary, and to be obeyed by all; all official documents in the 
country must be drawn up in his name; and he may assume the purple and may wear golden ornaments; 

1 Ma 1 4:44 “Furthermore, it is against the law for any member of the public or of the priesthood to contravene 
any of these enactments or to contest his decisions, or to convene a meeting anywhere in the country without his 
permission, or to assume the purple or wear the golden brooch; 

IMa 14:45 and anyone acting contrary to, or rejecting any article of, these enactments is liable to punishment; 
IMa 14:46 “And since the people have unanimously agreed to grant Simon the right to act as aforesaid, and 
IMa 14:47 since Simon, for his part, has given his assent, and has consented to assume the high-priestly office 
and to be commander-in-chief and ethnarch of the Jews and their priests, and to preside over all: 

IMa 14:48 “So, be it now enacted: that this record be inscribed on bronze tablets and be erected at some 
conspicuous place within the precincts of the Temple, 

1 Ma 1 4:49 and that copies be deposited in the T reasury for Simon and his descendants”. 

IMa 15:1 Antiochus son of King Demetrius addressed a letter from the Mediterranean Isles to Simon, priest and 
ethnarch of the Jews, and to the whole nation; 

IMa 15:2 this was how it read: “King Antiochus to Simon, high priest and ethnarch, and to the Jewish nation, 
greetings. 

IMa 15:3 “Whereas certain scoundrels have seized control of the kingdom of our fathers, and I propose to claim 
back the kingdom so that I may re-establish it as it was before, and whereäs I have accordingly recruited very 
large forces and fitted out warships, 

IMa 15:4 intending to make a landing in the country and to hunt down the men who have ruined it and laid 
waste many towns in my kingdom; 

1 Ma 1 5:5 “I now, therefore, confirm in your favour all remissions of taxes granted to you by the kings my 
predecessors, as well as the waiving of whatever presents they may have conceded. 

1 Ma 1 5:6 I hereby authorise you to mint your own coinage as legal tender for your own country. 

IMa 15:7 I declare Jerusalem and the sanctuary to be free; all the arms you have manufactured and the 
fortresses you have built and now occupy may remain yours. 

IMa 15:8 All debts to the royal treasury, present or future, are cancelled henceforth in perpetuity. 

IMa 15:9 Furthermore, when we have won back our kingdom, we shall bestow such great honour on yourself, 
your nation and the sanctuary as will make your glory known throughout the world”. 

IMa 15:10 Antiochus invaded the land of his ancestors in the year 174 and, since the troops all rallied to him, 
Trypho was left with few supporters. 

IMa 15:1 1 Antiochus pursued the usurper, who took refuge in Dora on the coast, 

IMa 15:12 knowing that misfortunes were piling up on him and that his troops had deserted him. 

IMa 15:13 Antiochus pitched camp outside Dora with a hundred and twenty thousand fighting men and eight 
thousand cavalry. 

IMa 15:14 He laid siege to the city while the ships closed in from the sea, so that he had the city under attack 
from land and sea, and allowed no one to go in or come out. 

IMa 15:15 Numenius and his companions, meanwhile, arrived from Rome, bringing letters addressed to various 
kings and states, in the following terms: 

IMa 15:16 “Lucius, consul of the Romans, to King Ptolemy, greetings. 

IMa 15:17 “The Jewish ambassadors have come to us as our friends and allies to renew our original friendship 



and alliance in the name of the high priest Simon and the Jewish people. 

IMa 15:18 They have brought a golden shield worth a thousand mina. 

IMa 15:19 Accordingly, we have seen fit to write to various kings and states, warning them neither to molest the 
Jewish people nor to attack either them or their towns or their country, nor to ally themselves with any such 
aggressors. 

1 Ma 1 5:20 We have seen fit to accept the shield from them. 

IMa 15:21 If, therefore, any scoundrels have fled their country to take refuge with you, hand them over to Simon 
the high priest, to be punished by him according to their law”. 

IMa 15:22 The consul sent the same letter to King Demetrius, to Attalus, Ariarathes and Arsaces, 

IMa 15:23 and to all states, including Sampsames, the Spartans, Delos, Myndos, Sicyon, Caria, Samos, 
Pamphylia, Lycia, Halicarnassus, Rhodes, Phaselis, Cos, Side, Arados, Gortyn, Cyprus and Cyrene. 

1 Ma 1 5:24 They also drew up a copy for Simon the high priest. 

1 Ma 15:25 Antiochus, meanwhile, from his positions on the outskirts of Dora, was continually throwing 
detachments against the town. He constructed siege-engines, and blockaded Trypho, preventing movement in 
or out. 

IMa 15:26 Simon sent him two thousand picked men to support him in the fight, with silver and gold and plenty 
of equipment. 

IMa 15:27 But Antiochus would not accept them; instead, he repudiated all his previous agreements with Simon 
and completely changed his attitude to him. 

1 Ma 1 5:28 He sent him Athenobius, one of his Friends, to confer with him and say, “You are now occupying 
Joppa and Gezer and the Citadel in Jerusalem, which are towns in my kingdom. 

1 Ma 1 5:29 You have laid waste their territory and done immense harm to the country; and you have seized 
control of many places properly in my kingdom. 

1 Ma 1 5:30 Either now surrender the towns you have taken and the taxes from the places you have seized 
outside the frontiers of Judaea, 

1 Ma 1 5:31 or else pay me five hundred talents of silver in compensation for them and for the destruction you 
have done, and another five hundred talents for the taxes from the towns; otherwise we shall come and make 
war on you”. 

IMa 15:32 When the King’s Friend, Athenobius, reached Jerusalem and saw Simon’s magnificence, his cabinet 
of gold and silver plate and the state he kept, he was dumbfounded. He delivered the king’s message, 

IMa 15:33 but Simon gave him this answer, “We have not taken foreign territory or any alien property but have 
occupied our ancestral heritage, for some time unjustly wrested from us by our enemies; 

IMa 15:34 now that we have a favourable opportunity, we are merely recovering our ancestral heritage. 

IMa 15:35 As regards Joppa and Gezer, which you claim, these were towns that did great harm to our people 
and laid waste our country; we are prepared to give a hundred talents for them”. Without so much as a word in 
answer, 

IMa 15:36 the envoy went back to the king in a rage and reported on Simon’s answer and his magnificence, 
and on everything he had seen, at which the king fell into a fury. 

IMa 15:37 Trypho now boarded a ship and escaped to Orthosia. 

1 Ma 1 5:38 The king appointed Cendebaeus military governor of the coastal region and allotted him a force of 
infantry and cavalry. 

IMa 15:39 He ordered him to deploy his men facing Judaea, and instructed him to rebuild Kedron and fortify its 
gates, and to make war on our people, while the king himself went in pursuit of T rypho. 

IMa 15:40 Cendebaeus arrived at Jamnia and began to provoke our people forthwith, invading Judaea, taking 
prisoners, and massacring. 

IMa 15:41 Having rebuilt Kedron, he stationed cavalry and troops there to make sorties and patrol the roads of 
Judaea, as the king had ordered. 

IMa 16:1 John then went up from Gezer and reported to his father Simon what Cendebaeus was busy doing. 
IMa 16:2 At this, Simon summoned his two elder sons, Judas and John, and said to them, “My brothers and I, 
and my father’s House, have fought the enemies of Israel from our youth until today, and many a time we have 
been successful in rescuing Israel. 

IMa 16:3 But now I am an old man, while you, by the mercy of Heaven, are the right age; take the place of my 
brother and myself, go out and fight for our nation, and may Heaven’s aid be with you”. 

IMa 16:4 He then selected twenty thousand of the country’s fighting men and cavalry, and these marched 
against Cendebaeus, spending the night at Modein. 

IMa 16:5 Making an early start, they marched into the plain, to find a large army opposing them, both infantry 
and cavalry; there was, however, a stream-bed in between. 

IMa 16:6 John drew up facing them, he and his army and, seeing that the men were afraid to cross the stream- 
bed, crossed over first himself. When his men saw this, they too crossed after him. 



1 Ma 1 6:7 He divided his army into two, with the cavalry in the centre and the infantry on either flank, as the 
opposing cavalry was very numerous. 

1 Ma 1 6:8 The trumpets rang out; Cendebaeus and his army were put to flight, many of them falling mortally 
wounded and the rest of them fleeing to the fortress. 

1 Ma 1 6:9 Then it was that Judas, John’s brother, was wounded, but John pursued them until Cendebaeus 
reached Kedron, which he had rebuilt. 

IMa 16:10 Their flight took them as far as the towers in the countryside of Azotus, and John burnt these down. 
The enemy losses amounted to ten thousand men; John returned safely to Judaea. 

IMa 16:1 1 Ptolemy son of Abubos had been appointed general in command of the Plain of Jericho; he owned a 
great deal of silver and gold, 

IMa 16:12 and was the high priest’s son-in-law. 

IMa 16:13 His ambition was fired; he hoped to make himself master of the whole country and therefore 
treacherously began to plot the destruction of Simon and his sons. 

IMa 16:14 Simon, who was inspecting the towns up and down the country and attending to their administration, 
had come down to Jericho with his sons Mattathias and Judas, in the year 172, in the eleventh month, the month 
of Shebat. 

IMa 16:15 The son of Abubos lured them into a small fortress called Dok, which he had built, where he offered 
them a great banquet, having previously hidden men in the place. 

IMa 16:16 When Simon and his sons were drunk, Ptolemy and his men reached for their weapons, rushed on 
Simon in the banqueting hall and killed him with his two sons and some of his servants. 

IMa 16:17 He thus committed a great act of treachery and rendered evil for good. 

IMa 16:18 Ptolemy wrote a report of the affair and sent it to the king, in the expectation of being sent 
reinforcements and of having the cities and the province made over to him. 

IMa 16:19 He also sent people to Gezerto murder John, and sent written orders to the military commanders to 
come to him so that he could give them silver, gold and presents; 

IMa 16:20 and he also sent others to seize control of Jerusalem and the Temple mount. 

IMa 16:21 But someöne had been too quick for him and had already informed John in Gezer that his father and 
brothers had perished, adding, “He is sending someöne to kill you too!”. 

IMa 16:22 Overcome as John was by the news, he arrested the men who had come to kill him and put them to 
death, being forewarned of their murderous design. 

IMa 16:23 The rest of John’s acts, the battles he fought and the exploits he performed, the city walls he built, 
and all his other achievements, 

IMa 16:24 from the day he succeeded his father as high priest, are recorded in the annals of his pontificate. 
2Ma 1:1 “To their brothers, the Jews living in Egypt, from their brothers, the Jews in Jerusalem and Judaea, 
greetings and untroubled peace. 

2Ma 1 :2 “May God prosper you, remembering his covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, his faithful 
servants. 

2Ma 1 :3 May he give you all a heart to worship him and to do his will with a generous mind and a willing spirit. 
2Ma 1:4 May he open your hearts to his Law and his precepts, and give you peace. 

2Ma 1 :5 May he hear your prayers and be reconciled with you, and not abandon you in time of evil. 

2Ma 1:6 Such is our prayer for you. 

2Ma 1:7 “During the reign of Demetrius, in the year 169, we Jews wrote to you as follows, ‘In the extremity of 
trouble that befell us in the years after Jason and his associates had betrayed the Holy Land and the kingdom, 

2Ma 1:8 burning down the Temple gateway and shedding innocent blood, we prayed to the Lord and were then 

heard. And we then offered a sacrifice, with wheat-flour, we lit the lamps and we set out the loaves’. 

2Ma 1 :9 “And we now recommend you too to keep the feast of Shelters in the month of Chislev, in the year one 
hundred and eighty-eight”. 

2Ma 1:10 “The people of Jerusalem and of Judaea, the senate and Judas, to Aristobulus, tutor to King Ptolemy 
and one of the family of the anointed priests, and to the Jews in Egypt, greetings and good health. 

2Ma 1:11 “Since we have been rescued by God from great danger, we give him great thanks for championing 
our cause against the king, 

2Ma 1:12 for he it was who carried off those who had taken up arms against the Holy City. 

2Ma 1:13 For when their leader reached Persia with his seemingly irresistible army, he was cut to pieces in the 
temple of Nanaea, as the result of a ruse employed by the priests who served that goddess. 

2Ma 1:14 On the pretext of marrying Nanaea, Antiochus came to the place with his friends, intending to take its 
many treasures as a dowry. 

2Ma 1:15 The priests of Nanaea had put these on display, and he for his part had entered the temple precincts 
with only a small retinue. As soon as Antiochus had gone inside the temple, the priests shut him in, 

2Ma 1:16 opened a trap-door hidden in the ceiling and struck the leader down by hurling stones like 



thunderbolts. They then cut him into pieces and threw his head to those who were waiting outside. 

2Ma 1:17 Blessed in all things be our God, who has delivered the sacrilegious over to death! 

2Ma 1:18 “As we shall be celebrating the purification of the Temple on the twenty-fifth of Chislev, we consider it 
proper to notify you, so that you too may celebrate it, as you do the feast of Shelters and the fire that appeared 
when Nehemiah, the builder of the Temple and the altar, offered sacrifice. 

2Ma 1:19 For when our ancestors were being deported to Persia, the devout priests of the time took some of 
the fire from the altar and hid it secretly in a hole like a dry well, where they concealed it in such a way that the 
place was unknown to anyone. 

2Ma 1 :20 When some years had elapsed, in God’s good time, Nehemiah, commissioned by the king of Persia, 
sent the descendants of the priests who had hidden the fire to look for it. When they reported that in fact they 
had found not fire but a thick liquid, Nehemiah ordered them to draw some out and bring it back. 

2Ma 1 :21 When they had done this, Nehemiah ordered the priests to pour this liquid over the sacrificial 
materials, that is, the wood and what lay on it. 

2Ma 1:22 When this had been done, and when in due course the sun, which had previously been clouded over, 
shone out, a great fire flared up, to the astonishment of all. 

2Ma 1:23 While the sacrifice was being burned, the priests offered prayer, Jonathan intoning with all the priests, 
and the rest responding with Nehemiah. 

2Ma 1 :24 The prayer took this form, ‘Lord, Lord God, Creator of all things, awesome, strong, just, merciful, the 
only king and benefactor, 

2Ma 1 :25 the only provider, who alone are just, almighty and everlasting, the deliverer of Israel from every evil, 
who made our fathers your chosen ones and sanctified them, 

2Ma 1 :26 accept this sacrifice on behalf of all your people Israel, and protect your heritage and consecrate it. 
2Ma 1 .21 Bring together those of us who are dispersed, set free those in slavery among the heathen, look 
favourably on those held in contempt or abhorrence, and let the heathen know that you are our God. 

2Ma 1 :28 Punish those who oppress us and affront us by their insolence, 

2Ma 1 :29 and plant your people firmly in your Holy Place, as Moses promised’. 

2Ma 1:30 “The priests then chanted hymns accompanied by the harp. 

2Ma 1:31 When the sacrifice had been burnt, Nehemiah ordered the remaining liquid to be poured over large 
stones, 

2Ma 1 :32 and when this was done a flame flared up, to be absorbed in a corresponding blaze of light from the 
altar. 

2Ma 1:33 When the matter became known and the king of the Persians heard that, in the place where the exiled 
priests had hidden the fire, a liquid had appeared, with which Nehemiah and his people had purified the 
sacrificial offerings, 

2Ma 1:34 the king, after verifying the facts, had the place enclosed and pronounced sacred. 

2Ma 1:35 To the people on whom the king bestowed it, he granted a part of the considerable revenue he 
derived from it. 

2Ma 1:36 Nehemiah and his people termed this stuff ‘nephtar’, which means ‘purification’, but it is commonly 
called ‘naphta’. 

2Ma 2:1 “It is on record that the prophet Jeremiah ordered the deportees to take the fire, as we have described, 
2Ma 2:2 and how, having given them the Law, the prophet warned the deportees never to forget the Lord’s 
precepts, nor to let their thoughts be tempted by the sight of gold and silver statues or the finery adorning them. 
2Ma 2:3 Among other similar admonitions, he urged them not to let the Law depart from their hearts. 

2Ma 2:4 “The same document also describes how the prophet, warned by an oracle, gave orders for the tent 
and the ark to go with him, when he set out for the mountain which Moses had climbed to survey God’s heritage. 
2Ma 2:5 On his arrival, Jeremiah found a cave-dwelling, into which he put the tent, the ark and the altar of 
incense, afterwards blocking up the entrance. 

2Ma 2:6 Some of his companions went back later to mark out the path but were unable to find it. 

2Ma 2:7 When Jeremiah learned this, he reproached them, ‘The place is to remain unknown’, he said, ‘until 
God gathers his people together again and shows them his mercy. 

2Ma 2:8 Then the Lord will bring these things once more to light, and the glory of the Lord will be seen, and so 
will the cloud, as it was revealed in the time of Moses and when Solomon prayed that the holy place might be 
gloriously hallowed’. 

2Ma 2:9 “It was also recorded how Solomon in his wisdom offered the sacrifice of the dedication and completion 
of the sanctuary. 

2Ma 2:10 As Moses had prayed to the Lord and fire had come down from heaven and burned up the sacrifice, 
so Solomon also prayed, and the fire from above consumed the burnt offerings. 

2Ma 2:1 1 Moses had said, ‘Because the sacrifice for sin had not been eaten, it was burnt instead’. 

2Ma 2:12 Solomon similarly observed the eight-day festival. 



2Ma 2:13 “In addition to the above, it was also recorded, both in these writings and in the Memoirs of Nehemiah, 
how Nehemiah founded a library and made a collection of the books dealing with the kings and the prophets, the 
writings of David and the letters of the kings on the subject of offerings. 

2Ma 2:14 Similarly, Judas made a complete collection of the books dispersed in the late war, and these we still 
have. 

2Ma 2:15 If you need any of them, send someöne to fetch them. 

2Ma 2:16 “Since we are about to celebrate the purification, we now write, requesting you to observe the same 
days. 

2Ma 2:17 God, who has saved his whole people, conferring heritage, kingdom, priesthood and sanctification on 
all of us, 

2Ma 2:18 as he has promised in the Law, will surely, as our hope is in him, be swift to show us mercy and 
gather us together from everywhere under heaven to the holy place, since he has rescued us from great evils 
and has purified it”. 

2Ma 2:19 The story of Judas Maccabaeus and his brothers, the purification of the great Temple, the dedication 
of the altar, 

2Ma 2:20 together with the wars against Antiochus Epiphanes and his son Eupator, 

2Ma 2:21 and the celestial manifestations that came to hearten the brave champions of Judaism, so that, few 
though they were, they pillaged the whole country, routed the barbarian hordes, 

2Ma 2:22 recovered the sanctuary renowned the whole world over, liberated the city and re-established the laws 
by then all but abolished, the Lord showing his favour by all his gracious help to them- 

2Ma 2:23 all this, already related in five books by Jason of Cyrene, we shall attempt to condense into a single 
work. 

2Ma 2:24 Considering the spate of figures and the difficulty encountered, because of the mass of material, by 
those who wish to immerse themselves in historical records, 

2Ma 2:25 we have aimed at providing diversion for those who merely want something to read, a saving of labour 
for those who enjoy committing things to memory, and profit for each and all. 

2Ma 2:26 For us who have undertaken the drudgery of this abridgement, it has been no easy task but a matter 
of sweat and midnight oil, 

2Ma 2:27 comparable to the exacting task of someöne organising a banquet, whose aim is to satisfy a variety of 
tastes. Nevertheless, for the sake of rendering a general service, we remain glad to endure this drudgery, 

2Ma 2:28 leaving accuracy of detail to the historian, and concentrating our effort on tracing the outlines in this 
condensed version. 

2Ma 2:29 Just as the architect of a new house is responsible for the construction as a whole, while the man 
undertaking the ceramic painting has to take into consideration only the decorative requirements, so, I think, it is 
with us. 

2Ma 2:30 To make the subject his own, to explore its by-ways, to be meticulous about details, is the business of 
the original historian, 

2Ma 2:31 but the person making the adaptation must be allowed to aim at conciseness of expression and to 
forgo any exhaustive treatment of his subject. 

2Ma 2:32 So now let us begin our narrative, without adding any more to what has been said above; there would 
be no sense in expanding the preface to the history and curtailing the history itself. 

2Ma 3:1 While the holy city was inhabited in all peace and the laws were observed as perfectly as possible, 
owing to the piety of Onias the high priest and his hatred of wickedness, 

2Ma 3:2 it came about that the kings themselves honoured the holy place and enhanced the glory of the Temple 
with the most splendid offerings, 

2Ma 3:3 even to the extent that Seleucus king of Asia defrayed from his own revenues all the expenses arising 
out of the sacrificial liturgy. 

2Ma 3:4 But a certain Simon, of the tribe of Bilgah, on being appointed administrator of the Temple, came into 
conflict with the high priest over the regulation of the city markets. 

2Ma 3:5 Unable to get the better of Onias, he went off to Apollonius, son of Thraseos, who was at that time 
commander-in-chief of Coele-Syria and Phoenicia, 

2Ma 3:6 and made out to him that the Treasury in Jerusalem was groaning with untold wealth, that the amount 
contributed was incalculable and out of all proportion to expenditure on the sacrifice, but that it could all be 
brought under the control of the king. 

2Ma 3:7 Apollonius met the king and told him about the wealth that had been disclosed to him; whereupon the 
king selected Heliodorus, his chancellor, and sent him with instructions to effect the removal of the reported 
wealth. 

2Ma 3:8 Heliodorus lost no time in setting out, ostensibly to inspect the towns of Coele-Syria and Phoenicia, but 
in fact to accomplish the king’s purpose. 



2Ma 3:9 On his arrival in Jerusalem, and after a hospitable reception from the high priest and the city, he 
announced what had been disclosed, thus revealing the reason for his presence, and asked if this was indeed 
the true situation. 

2Ma 3:10 The high priest explained that there were funds set aside for widows and orphans, 

2Ma 3:11 with some belonging to Hyrcanus son of Tobias, a man occupying a very exalted position, and that 
the whole sum, in contrast to what the evil Simon had alleged, amounted to four hundred talents of silver and 
two hundred of gold. 

2Ma 3:12 He also added that it was entirely out of the question that an injustice should be done to those who 
had put their trust in the sanctity of the place and in the inviolable majesty of a Temple venerated throughout the 
entire world. 

2Ma 3:13 But Heliodorus, because of his instructions from the king, peremptorily insisted that the funds must be 
confiscated for the royal exchequer. 

2Ma 3:14 Fixing a day for the purpose, he went in to draw up an inventory of the funds. There was no little 
consternation throughout the city; 

2Ma 3:15 the priests in their sacred vestments prostrated themselves before the altar and prayed to Heaven, to 
the Author of the law governing deposits, to preserve these funds intact for the depositors. 

2Ma 3:16 The appearance of the high priest was enough to pierce the heart of the beholder, his expression and 
his altered colour betraying the anguish of his soul; 

2Ma 3:17 the man was so overwhelmed by fear and bodily trembling that those who saw him could not possibly 
mistake the distress he was suffering. 

2Ma 3:18 People rushed headlong from the houses, intent on making public supplication because of the 
indignity threatening the holy place. 

2Ma 3:19 Women thronged the streets swathed in sackcloth below their breasts; girls secluded indoors came 
running, some to the doorways, some to the city walls, while others leaned out of the windows, 

2Ma 3:20 all stretching out their hands to Heaven in entreaty. 

2Ma 3:21 It was pitiful to see the people crowding together to prostrate themselves, and the foreboding of the 
high priest in his deep anguish. 

2Ma 3:22 While they were calling on the all-powerful Lord to preserve the deposits intact for the depositors, in 
full security, 

2Ma 3:23 Heliodorus set about his appointed task. 

2Ma 3:24 He had already arrived with his bodyguard near the Treasury, when the Sovereign of spirits and of 
every power caused so great an apparition that all who had dared to accompany Heliodorus were dumbfounded 
at the power of God and reduced to abject terror. 

2Ma 3:25 Before their eyes appeared a horse richly caparisoned and carrying a fearsome rider. Rearing 
violently, it struck at Heliodorus with its forefeet. The rider was seen to be accoutred entirely in gold. 

2Ma 3:26 Two other young men of outstanding strength and radiant beauty, magnificently apparelled, appeared 
to him at the same time and, taking their stand on each side of him, flogged him unremittingly, inflicting stroke 
after stroke. 

2Ma 3:27 Suddenly Heliodorus fell to the ground, enveloped in thick darkness. His men came to his rescue and 
placed him in a litter, 

2Ma 3:28 this man who but a moment before had made his way into the Treasury, as we said above, with a 
great retinue and his whole bodyguard; and as they carried him away, powerless to help himself, they openly 
acknowledged the sovereign power of God. 

2Ma 3:29 While Heliodorus lay prostrate under the divine visitation, speechless and bereft of all hope of 
deliverance, 

2Ma 3:30 the Jews blessed the Lord who had miraculously glorified his own holy place. And the Temple, which 
a little while before had been filled with terror and commotion, now overflowed with joy and gladness at the 
manifestation of the almighty Lord. 

2Ma 3:31 Some of Heliodorus’ companions quickly begged Onias to entreat the Most High to grant the man his 
life, lying as he did at the very point of death. 

2Ma 3:32 The high priest, afraid that the king might suspect the Jews of some foul play concerning Heliodorus, 
did indeed offer a sacrifice for the man’s recovery. 

2Ma 3:33 And while the high priest was performing the rite of expiation, the same young men again appeared to 
Heliodorus, wearing the same apparel and, standing beside him, said, “Be very grateful to Onias the high priest, 
since it is for his sake that the Lord has granted you your life. 

2Ma 3:34 As for you, who have been scourged by Heaven, you must proclaim to everyone the grandeur of 
God’s power”. So saying, they vanished. 

2Ma 3:35 Heliodorus offered sacrifice to the Lord and made most solemn vows to the preserver of his life, and 
then took courteous leave of Onias and marched his forces back to the king. 



2Ma 3:36 He openly testified to everyone about the works of the supreme God which he had seen with his own 
eyes. 

2Ma 3:37 When the king asked Heliodorus what sort of man would be the right person to send to Jerusalem on 
a second occasion, he replied, 

2Ma 3:38 “If you have some enemy or anyone disloyal to the state, send him there, and you will get him back 
well flogged, if he survives at all, since some peculiarly divine power attaches to the holy place. 

2Ma 3:39 He who has his dwelling in heaven watches over the place and defends it, and he strikes down and 
destroys those who come to harm it”. 

2Ma 3:40 This was the outcome of the affair of Heliodorus and the preservation of the Treasury. 

2Ma 4:1 The Simon mentioned above as the informer against the funds and against his country began 
slandering Onias, insinuating that the latter had been responsible for the assault on Heliodorus and himself had 
contrived this misfortune. 

2Ma 4:2 Simon now had the effrontery to name this benefactor of the city, this protector of his compatriots, this 
zealot for the laws, as an enemy of the public good. 

2Ma 4:3 This hostility reached such proportions that murders were actually committed by some of Simon’s 
agents, 

2Ma 4:4 and at this point Onias, recognising how mischievous this rivalry was, and aware that Apollonius son of 
Menestheus, the general commanding Coele-Syria and Phoenicia, was encouraging Simon in his malice, 

2Ma 4:5 went to see the king, not to play the accuser of his fellow-citizens, but having the public and private 
welfare of the entire people at heart. 

2Ma 4:6 He saw that, without some intervention by the king, an orderly administration would no longer be 
possible, nor would Simon put a stop to his folly. 

2Ma 4:7 When Seleucus had departed this life and Antiochus styled Epiphanes had succeeded to the kingdom, 
Jason, brother of Onias, usurped the high priesthood: 

2Ma 4:8 he approached the king with a promise of three hundred and sixty talents of silver, with eighty talents to 
come from some other source of revenue. 

2Ma 4:9 He further committed himself to paying another hundred and fifty, if the king would empower him to set 
up a gymnasium and youth centre, and to register the Antiochists of Jerusalem. 

2Ma 4:10 When the king gave his assent, Jason, as soon as he had seized power, imposed the Greek way of 
life on his fellow-countrymen. 

2Ma 4:1 1 He suppressed the liberties which the kings had graciously granted to the Jews at the instance of 
John, father of that Eupolemus who was later to be sent on an embassy to negotiate a treaty of friendship and 
alliance with the Romans and, overthrowing the lawful institutions, introduced new usages contrary to the Law. 
2Ma 4:12 He went so far as to found a gymnasium at the very foot of the Citadel, and to fit out the noblest of his 
young men in the petasos. 

2Ma 4:13 Godless wretch that he was and no true high priest, Jason set no bounds to his impiety; indeed the 
hellenising process reached such a pitch 

2Ma 4:14 that the priests ceased to show any interest in serving the altar; but, scorning the Temple and 
neglecting the sacrifices, they would hurry, on the stroke of the gong, to take part in the distribution, forbidden by 
the Law, of the oil on the exercise ground; 

2Ma 4:15 setting no store by the honours of their fatherland, they esteemed hellenic glories best of all. 

2Ma 4:16 But all this brought its own retribution; the very people whose way of life they envied, whom they 
sought to resemble in everything, proved to be their enemies and executioners. 

2Ma 4:17 It is no small thing to violate the divine laws, as the period that followed will demonstrate. 

2Ma 4:18 On the occasion of the quadrennial games at Tyre in the presence of the king, 

2Ma 4:19 the vile Jason sent an embassy of Antiochists from Jerusalem, taking with them three hundred silver 
drachmas for the sacrifice to Hercules. But even those who brought the money did not think it would be right to 
spend it on the sacrifice and decided to reserve it for some other item of expenditure; 

2Ma 4:20 and so what the sender had intended for the sacrifice to Hercules was in fact applied, at the 
suggestion of those who brought it, to the construction of triremes. 

2Ma 4:21 Apollonius son of Menestheus had been sent to Egypt to attend the wedding of King Philometor. 
Antiochus, having learnt that the latter had become hostile to his affairs, began thinking about his own safety: 
that was why he had come to Joppa. He then moved to Jerusalem, 

2Ma 4:22 where he was given a magnificent welcome by Jason and the city, and escorted in by torchlight with 
acclamation. After which, he marched his army into Phoenicia. 

2Ma 4:23 When three years had passed, Jason sent Menelaus, brother of the Simon mentioned above, to 
convey the money to the king and to complete negotiations on various essential matters. 

2Ma 4:24 But Menelaus, on being presented to the king, flattered him by his own appearance of authority, and 
so secured the high priesthood for himself, outbidding Jason by three hundred talents of silver. 



2Ma 4:25 He returned with the royal mandate, bringing nothing worthy of the high priesthood and supported 
only by the fury of a cruel tyrant and the rage of a savage beast. 

2Ma 4:26 Thus Jason, who had supplanted his own brother, was in turn supplanted by a third, and obliged to 
take refuge in Ammanitis. 

2Ma 4:27 As for Menelaus, he secured the office, but defaulted altogether on the sums promised to the king, 
2Ma 4:28 although Sostratus, the commandant of the Citadel, whose business it was to collect the revenue, 
kept demanding payment. The pair of them in consequence were summoned before the king, 

2Ma 4:29 Menelaus leaving his brother Lysimachus as deputy high priest, while Sostratus left Crates, the 
commander of the Cypriots, to act for him. 

2Ma 4:30 While all this was going on, it happened that the people of Tarsus and Mallus revolted, because their 
towns had been given as a present to Antiochis, the king’s concubine. 

2Ma 4:31 The king therefore hurried off to settle the affair, leaving Andronicus, one of his dignitaries, to act as 
his deputy. 

2Ma 4:32 Thinking he had found a favourable opportunity, Menelaus abstracted a number of golden vessels 
from the Temple and presented them to Andronicus, and managed to sell others to Tyre and the surrounding 
cities. 

2Ma 4:33 On receiving clear evidence to this effect, Onias retired to a place of sanctuary at Daphne near 
Antioch and then taxed him with it. 

2Ma 4:34 Menelaus then had a quiet word with Andronicus, urging him to get rid of Onias. Andronicus sought 
out Onias and, resorting to the trick of offering him his right hand on oath, succeeded in persuading him, despite 
the latter’s lingering suspicions, to leave sanctuary; whereupon, in defiance of all justice, he immediately put him 
to death. 

2Ma 4:35 The result was that not only Jews but many people of other nationalities were appalled and outraged 
by the unjust murder of this man. 

2Ma 4:36 On the king’s return from the region of Cilicia, the Jews of the capital, and those Greeks who shared 
their hatred of the crime, appealed to him about the unjustified murder of Onias. 

2Ma 4:37 Antiochus was profoundly grieved and filled with pity, and he wept for the prudence and moderation of 
the dead man. 

2Ma 4:38 Burning with indignation, he immediately stripped Andronicus of the purple, tore his garments off him 
and, parading him through the length of the city, rid the world of the assassin on the very spot where he had laid 
impious hands on Onias, the Lord dealing out to him the punishment he deserved. 

2Ma 4:39 Now Lysimachus with the connivance of Menelaus had committed many sacrilegious thefts in the city, 
and when the facts became widely known, the populace rose against Lysimachus, who had already disposed of 
many pieces of gold plate. 

2Ma 4:40 The infuriated mob was becoming menacing, and Lysimachus armed nearly three thousand men and 
took aggressive action; the troops were led by a certain Auranus, a man advanced in years and no less in folly. 
2Ma 4:41 Recognising this act of aggression as the work of Lysimachus, some snatched up stones, others 
cudgels, while others scooped up handfuls of ashes lying at hand, and all hurled everything indiscriminately at 
Lysimachus’ men, 

2Ma 4:42 to such effect that they wounded many of them, even killing a few, and routed them all; the 
sacrilegious thief himself they killed near the Treasury. 

2Ma 4:43 As a result of this, legal proceedings were taken against Menelaus. 

2Ma 4:44 When the king came down to Tyre, three men deputed by the Senate pleaded their case before him. 
2Ma 4:45 Menelaus, seeing the case had gone against him, promised a substantial sum to Ptolemy son of 
Dorymenes if he would influence the king in his favour. 

2Ma 4:46 Ptolemy then took the king aside into a colonnade, as though for a breath of fresh air, and persuaded 
him to change his mind; 

2Ma 4:47 the king then dismissed the charges against Menelaus, the cause of all this evil, while he condemned 
to death the other poor wretches who, had they pleaded even before Scythians, would have been let off scot- 
free. 

2Ma 4:48 No time was lost in carrying out this unjust punishment on those who had championed the cause of 
the city, the townships and the sacred vessels. 

2Ma 4:49 Some Tyrians even were so outraged by the crime that they provided sumptuously for their funeral, 
2Ma 4:50 while, as a result of the greed of the powerful, Menelaus remained in power, growing more wicked 
than ever and establishing himself as the chief enemy of his fellow-citizens. 

2Ma 5:1 At about this time, Antiochus was preparing for his second attack on Egypt. 

2Ma 5:2 It then happened that all over the city for nearly forty days there were apparitions of horsemen 
galloping through the air in cloth of gold, troops of lancers fully armed, 

2Ma 5:3 squadrons of cavalry in order of battle, attacks and charges this way and that, a flourish of shields, a 



forest of pikes, a brandishing of swords, a hurling of missiles, a glittering of golden accoutrements and armour of 
all kinds. 

2Ma 5:4 So everyone prayed that this manifestation might prove a good omen. 

2Ma 5:5 Then, on the strength of a false report that Antiochus was dead, Jason took at least a thousand men 
and launched an unexpected attack on the city. When the walls had been breached and the city was finally on 
the point of being taken, Menelaus took refuge in the Citadel. 

2Ma 5:6 Jason, however, made a pitiless slaughter of his fellow-citizens, oblivious of the fact that success 
against his own countrymen was the greatest of disasters, but rather picturing himself as winning trophies from 
some enemy, and not from his fellow- countrymen. 

2Ma 5:7 Even so, he did not manage to seize power; and, in the end, his machinations brought him nothing but 
shame, and he took refuge once more in Ammanitis. 

2Ma 5:8 His career of wickedness was thus brought to a halt: imprisoned by Aretas, the Arab despot, escaping 
from his town, hunted by everyone, detested for having overthrown the laws, abhorred as the butcher of his 
country and his countrymen, he drifted to Egypt. 

2Ma 5:9 He who had exiled so many from their fatherland, himself perished on foreign soil, having travelled to 
Sparta, hoping that, for kinship’s sake, he might find harbour there. 

2Ma 5:10 So many carcases he had thrust out to lie unburied; now he himself had none to mourn him, no 
funeral rites, no place in the tomb of his ancestors. 

2Ma 5:1 1 When the king came to hear of what had happened, he concluded that Judaea was in revolt. He 
therefore marched from Egypt, raging like a wild beast, and began by storming the city. 

2Ma 5:12 He then ordered his soldiers to cut down without mercy everyone they encountered, and to butcher all 
who took refuge in their houses. 

2Ma 5:13 It was a massacre of young and old, a slaughter of women and children, a butchery of young girls and 
infants. 

2Ma 5:14 There were eighty thousand victims in the course of those three days, forty thousand dying by 
violence and as many again being sold into slavery. 

2Ma 5:15 Not content with this, he had the audacity to enter the holiest Temple in the entire world, with 
Menelaus, that traitor to the laws and to his country, as his guide; 

2Ma 5:16 with impure hands he seized the sacred vessels; with impious hands he seized the offerings 
presented by other kings for the aggrandisement, glory and dignity of the holy place. 

2Ma 5:17 Holding so high an opinion of himself, Antiochus did not realise that the Lord was temporarily angry at 
the sins of the inhabitants of the city, hence his unconcern for the holy place. 

2Ma 5:18 Had they not been entangled in many sins, Antiochus too, like Heliodorus when King Seleucus sent 
him to inspect the Treasury, would have been flogged the moment he arrived and checked in his presumption. 
2Ma 5:19 The Lord, however, had not chosen the people for the sake of the holy place, but the holy place for 
the sake of the people; 

2Ma 5:20 and so the holy place itself, having shared the disasters that befell the people, in due course also 
shared their good fortune; having been abandoned by the Almighty in his anger, once the great Sovereign was 
placated it was reinstated in all its glory. 

2Ma 5:21 Antiochus, having extracted eighteen hundred talents from the Temple, hurried back to Antioch; in his 
pride he would have undertaken to make the dry land navigable and the sea passable on foot, so high his 
arrogance soared. 

2Ma 5:22 But he left officials behind to plague the nation: in Jerusalem, Philip, a Phrygian by race, and by 
nature more barbarous than the man who appointed him; 

2Ma 5:23 on Mount Gerizim, Andronicus; and, besides these, Menelaus, who lorded it over his countrymen 
worse than all the others. In his rooted hostility to the Jews, 

2Ma 5:24 the king also sent the Mysarch Apollonius at the head of an army twenty-two thousand strong, with 
orders to put to death all men in their prime and to sell the women and children. 

2Ma 5:25 Arriving in Jerusalem and posing as a man of peace, this man waited until the holy day of the Sabbath 
and then, taking advantage of the Jews as they rested from work, ordered his men to parade fully armed; 

2Ma 5:26 all those who came out to watch he put to the sword; then, rushing into the city with his armed troops, 
he cut down an immense number of people. 

2Ma 5:27 Judas, also known as Maccabaeus, however, with about nine others, withdrew into the desert. He 
lived like the wild animals in the hills with his companions, eating nothing but wild plants to avoid contracting 
defilement. 

2Ma 6:1 Shortly afterwards, the king sent Gerontes the Athenian to force the Jews to violate their ancestral 
customs and live no longer by the laws of God; 

2Ma 6:2 and to profane the Temple in Jerusalem and dedicate it to Olympian Zeus, and the one on Mount 
Gerizim to Zeus, Patron of Strangers, as the inhabitants of the latter place had requested. 



2Ma 6:3 The advent of these evils was painfully hard for all the people to bear. 

2Ma 6:4 The Temple was filled with revelling and debauchery by the gentiles, who took their pleasure with 
prostitutes and had intercourse with women in the sacred precincts, introducing other indecencies besides. 

2Ma 6:5 The altar of sacrifice was loaded with victims proscribed by the law as profane. 

2Ma 6:6 No one might either keep the Sabbath or observe the traditional feasts, or so much as admit to being a 
Jew. 

2Ma 6:7 People were driven by harsh compulsion to take part in the monthly ritual meal commemorating the 
king’s birthday; and when a feast of Dionysus occurred, they were forced to wear ivy wreaths and walk in the 
Dionysiac procession. 

2Ma 6:8 A decree was issued at the instance of the people of Ptolemais for the neighbouring Greek cities, 
enforcing the same conduct on the Jews there, obliging them to share in the sacrificial meals, 

2Ma 6:9 and ordering the execution of those who would not voluntarily conform to Greek customs. So it became 
clear that disaster was imminent. 

2Ma 6:10 For example, two women were charged with having circumcised their children. They were paraded 
publicly round the town, with their babies hung at their breasts, and then hurled over the city wall. 

2Ma 6:1 1 Other people, who had assembled in some near-by caves to keep the seventh day without attracting 
attention, were denounced to Philip, and were then all burnt to death together, since their consciences would not 
allow them to defend themselves, out of respect for the holiness of the day. 

2Ma 6:12 Now, I urge anyone who may read this book not to be dismayed at these calamities, but to reflect that 
such visitations are intended not to destroy our race but to discipline it. 

2Ma 6:13 Indeed, when evil-doers are not left for long to their own devices but incur swift retribution, it is a sign 
of great benevolence. 

2Ma 6:14 In the case of other nations, the Master waits patiently for them to attain the full measure of their sins 
before he punishes them, but with us he has decided to deal differently, 

2Ma 6:15 rather than have to punish us later, when our sins come to full measure. 

2Ma 6:16 And so he never entirely withdraws his mercy from us; he may discipline us by some disaster, but he 
does not desert his own people. 

2Ma 6:17 Let this be said simply by way of reminder; we must return to our story without more ado. 

2Ma 6:18 Eleazar, one of the foremost teachers of the Law, a man already advanced in years and of most noble 
appearance, had his mouth forced open, to make him eat a piece of pork. 

2Ma 6:19 But he, resolving to die with honour rather than to live disgraced, walked of his own accord to the 
torture of the wheel, 

2Ma 6:20 having spat the stuff out, as befits those with the courage to reject what is not lawful to taste, rather 
than live. 

2Ma 6:21 The people supervising the ritual meal, forbidden by the Law, because of the length of time for which 
they had known him, took him aside and privately urged him to have meat brought of a kind he could properly 
use, prepared by himself, and only pretend to eat the portions of sacrificial meat as prescribed by the king; 

2Ma 6:22 this action would enable him to escape death, by availing himself of an act of kindness prompted by 
their long friendship. 

2Ma 6:23 But having taken a noble decision worthy of his years and the dignity of his great age and the well- 
earned distinction of his grey hairs, worthy too of his impeccable conduct from boyhood, and above all of the 
holy legislation established by God himself, he answered accordingly, telling them to send him at once to Hades. 
2Ma 6:24 “Pretence”, he said, “does not befit our time of life; many young people would suppose that Eleazar at 
the age of ninety had conformed to the foreigners’ way of life 

2Ma 6:25 and, because I had played this part for the sake of a paltry brief spell of life, might themselves be led 
astray on my account; I should only bring defilement and disgrace on my old age. 

2Ma 6:26 Even though for the moment I avoid execution by man, I can never, living or dead, elude the grasp of 
the Almighty. 

2Ma 6:27 Therefore if I am man enough to quit this life here and now, I shall prove myself worthy of my old age, 
2Ma 6:28 and I shall have left the young a noble example of how to make a good death, eagerly and 
generously, for the venerable and holy laws”. So saying, he walked straight to the wheel, 

2Ma 6:29 while those who were escorting him, recently so well disposed towards him, turned against him after 
this declaration, which they regarded as sheer madness. 

2Ma 6:30 He for his part, just before he died under the blows, gave a sigh and said, “The Lord whose knowledge 
is holy sees clearly that, though I might have escaped death, from awe of him I gladly endure these agonies of 
body under the lash, and that in my soul I am glad to suffer”. 

2Ma 6:31 This was how he died, leaving his death as an example of nobility and a record of virtue not only for 
the young but for the greater part of the nation. 

2Ma 7:1 It also happened that seven brothers were arrested with their mother. The king tried to force them to 



taste some pork, which the Law forbids, by torturing them with whips and scourges. 

2Ma 7:2 One of them, acting as spokesman for the others, said, “What are you trying to find out from us? We 
are prepared to die rather than break the laws of our ancestors”. 

2Ma 7:3 The king, in a fury, ordered pans and cauldrons to be heated over a fire. 

2Ma 7:4 As soon as these were red-hot, he commanded that their spokesman should have his tongue cut out, 
his head scalped and his extremities cut off, while the other brothers and his mother looked on. 

2Ma 7:5 When he had been rendered completely helpless, the king gave orders for him to be brought, still 
breathing, to the fire and fried alive in a pan. As the smoke from the pan drifted about, his mother and the rest 
encouraged one another to die nobly, with such words as these, 

2Ma 7:6 “The Lord God is watching and certainly feels sorry for us, as Moses declared in his song, which clearly 
states that ‘he will take pity on his servants’”. 

2Ma 7:7 When the first had left the world in this way, they brought the second forward to be tortured. After 
stripping the skin from his head, hair and all, they asked him, “Will you eat some pork, before your body is 
tortured limb by limb?”. 

2Ma 7:8 Replying in his ancestral tongue, he said, “No!”. So he too was put to the torture in his turn. 

2Ma 7:9 With his last breath he exclaimed, “Cruel brute, you may discharge us from this present life, but the 
King of the world will raise us up, since we die for his laws, to live again for ever”. 

2Ma 7:10 After him, they tortured the third, who on being asked for his tongue promptly thrust it out and boldly 
held out his hands, 

2Ma 7:1 1 courageously saying, “Heaven gave me these limbs; for the sake of his laws I have no concern for 
them; from him I hope to receive them again”. 

2Ma 7:12 The king and his attendants were astounded at the young man’s courage and his utter indifference to 
suffering. 

2Ma 7:13 When this one was dead they subjected the fourth to the same torments and tortures. 

2Ma 7:14 When he neared his end he cried, “Ours is the better choice, to meet death at men’s hands, yet relying 
on God’s promise that we shall be raised up by him; whereäs for you there can be no resurrection to new life”. 
2Ma 7:15 Next they brought forward the fifth and began torturing him. 

2Ma 7:16 But he looked at the king and said, “You have power over human beings, mortal as you are, and can 
act as you please. But do not think that our race has been deserted by God. 

2Ma 7:17 Only wait, and you will see in your turn how his mighty power will torment you and your descendants”. 
2Ma 7:18 After him, they led out the sixth, and his dying words were these, “Do not delude yourself: we are 
suffering like this through our own fault, having sinned against our own God; hence, appalling things have 
befallen us- 

2Ma 7:19 but do not think you yourself will go unpunished for attempting to make war on God”. 

2Ma 7:20 But the mother was especially admirable and worthy of honourable remembrance, for she watched 
the death of seven sons in the course of a single day, and bravely endured it because of her hopes in the Lord. 
2Ma 7:21 Indeed she encouraged each of them in their ancestral tongue; filled with noble conviction, she 
reinforced her womanly argument with manly courage, saying to them, 

2Ma 7:22 “I do not know how you appeared in my womb; it was not I who endowed you with breath and life, I 
had not the shaping of your every part. 

2Ma 7:23 And hence, the Creator of the world, who made everyone and ordained the origin of all things, will in 
his mercy give you back breath and life, since for the sake of his laws you have no concern for yourselves”. 

2Ma 7:24 Antiochus thought he was being ridiculed, suspecting insult in the tone of her voice; and as the 
youngest was still alive he appealed to him not with mere words but with promises on oath to make him both rich 
and happy if he would abandon the traditions of his ancestors; he would make him his Friend and entrust him 
with public office. 

2Ma 7:25 The young man took no notice at all, and so the king then appealed to the mother, urging her to 
advise the youth to save his life. 

2Ma 7:26 After a great deal of urging on his part she agreed to try persuasion on her son. 

2Ma 7:27 Bending over him, she fooled the cruel tyrant with these words, uttered in their ancestral tongue, “My 
son, have pity on me; I carried you nine months in my womb and suckled you three years, fed you and reared 
you to the age you are now, and provided for you. 

2Ma 7:28 I implore you, my child, look at the earth and sky and everything in them, and consider how God made 
them out of what did not exist, and that human beings come into being in the same way. 

2Ma 7:29 Do not fear this executioner, but prove yourself worthy of your brothers and accept death, so that I 
may receive you back with them in the day of mercy”. 

2Ma 7:30 She had hardly finished, when the young man said, “What are you all waiting for? I will not comply 
with the king’s ordinance; I obey the ordinance of the Law given to our ancestors through Moses. 

2Ma 7:31 As for you, who have contrived every kind of evil against the Hebrews, you will certainly not escape 



the hands of God. 

2Ma 7:32 We are suffering for our own sins; 

2Ma 7:33 and if, to punish and discipline us, our living Lord is briefly angry with us, he will be reconciled with us 
in due course. 

2Ma 7:34 But you, unholy wretch and wickedest of villains, what cause have you for pride, nourishing vain 
hopes and raising your hand against his servants? - 

2Ma 7:35 for you have not yet escaped the judgement of God the almighty, the all-seeing. 

2Ma 7:36 Our brothers, having endured brief pain, for the sake of ever-flowing life have died for the covenant of 
God, while you, by God’s judgement, will have to pay the just penalty for your arrogance. 

2Ma 7:37 I too, like my brothers, surrender my body and life for the laws of my ancestors, begging God quickly 
to take pity on our nation, and by trials and afflictions to bring you to confess that he alone is God, 

2Ma 7:38 so that with my brothers and myself there may be an end to the wrath of the Almighty, rightly let loose 
on our whole nation”. 

2Ma 7:39 The king fell into a rage and treated this one more cruelly than the others, for he was himself smarting 
from the young man’s scorn. 

2Ma 7:40 And so the last brother met his end undefiled and with perfect trust in the Lord. 

2Ma 7:41 The mother was the last to die, after her sons. 

2Ma 7:42 But let this be sufficient account of the ritual meals and monstrous tortures. 

2Ma 8:1 Judas, otherwise known as Maccabaeus, and his companions made their way secretly among the 
villages, rallying their fellow-countrymen; they recruited those who remained loyal to Judaism and assembled 
about six thousand. 

2Ma 8:2 They called on the Lord to have regard for the people oppressed on all sides, to take pity on the 
Temple profaned by the godless, 

2Ma 8:3 to have mercy on the city now being destroyed and levelled to the ground, to hear the blood of the 
victims that cried aloud to him, 

2Ma 8:4 to remember too the criminal slaughter of innocent babies and to avenge the blasphemies perpetrated 
against his name. 

2Ma 8:5 As soon as Maccabaeus had an organised force, he at once proved invincible to the foreigners, the 
Lord’s anger having turned into compassion. 

2Ma 8:6 Making surprise attacks on towns and villages, he fired them; he captured favourable positions and 
inflicted very heavy losses on the enemy, 

2Ma 8:7 generally availing himself of the cover of night for such enterprises. The fame of his valour spread far 
and wide. 

2Ma 8:8 When Philip saw Judas was making steady progress and winning more and more frequent successes, 
he wrote to Ptolemy, the general officer commanding Coele-Syria and Phoenicia, asking for reinforcements in 
the royal interest. 

2Ma 8:9 Ptolemy chose Nicanor son of Patroclus, one of the king’s First Friends, and sent him without delay at 
the head of an international force of at least twenty thousand men to exterminate the entire Jewish race. As his 
associate he appointed Gorgias, a professional general of wide military experience. 

2Ma 8:10 Nicanor for his part proposed, by the sale of Jewish prisoners of war, to raise the two thousand talents 
of tribute money owed by the king to the Romans. 

2Ma 8:1 1 He lost no time in sending the seaboard towns an invitation to come and buy Jewish manpower, 
promising delivery of ninety head for one talent; but he did not reckon on the judgement from the Almighty that 
was soon to overtake him. 

2Ma 8:12 When news reached Judas of Nicanor’s advance, he warned his men of the enemy’s approach, 

2Ma 8:13 whereupon the cowardly ones and those who lacked confidence in the justice of God took to their 
heels and ran away. 

2Ma 8:14 The rest sold all their remaining possessions, at the same time praying the Lord to deliver them from 
the godless Nicanor, who had sold them even in advance of any encounter- 

2Ma 8:15 if not for their own sakes, then at least out of consideration for the covenants made with their 
ancestors, and because they themselves bore his sacred and majestic name. 

2Ma 8:16 Maccabaeus marshalled his men, who numbered about six thousand, and exhorted them not to be 
dismayed at the enemy or discouraged at the vast horde of gentiles wickedly advancing against them, but to 
fight bravely, 

2Ma 8:17 keeping before their eyes the outrage committed by them against the holy place and the infamous and 
scornful treatment inflicted on the city, not to mention the destruction of their traditional way of life. 

2Ma 8:18 “They may put their trust in their weapons and their exploits”, he said, “but our confidence is in almighty 
God, who is able with a single nod to overthrow both those marching on us and the whole world with them”. 

2Ma 8:19 He reminded them of the occasions on which their ancestors had received help: that time when, under 



Sennacherib, a hundred and eighty-five thousand men had perished; 

2Ma 8:20 that time in Babylonia when in the battle with the Galatians the Jewish combatants numbered only 
eight thousand, with four thousand Macedonians, yet when the Macedonians were hard pressed, the eight 
thousand had destroyed a hundred and twenty thousand, thanks to the help they had received from Heaven, and 
had taken great booty as a result. 

2Ma 8:21 Having so roused their courage by these words that they were ready to die for the laws and their 
country, he then divided his army into four, 

2Ma 8:22 putting his brothers, Simon, Joseph and Jonathan in command of one division each, and assigning 
them fifteen hundred men apiece. 

2Ma 8:23 Next, he ordered Esdrias to read the Holy Book aloud and gave them their watchword ‘Help from 
God’. Then, putting himself at the head of the first division, he attacked Nicanor. 

2Ma 8:24 With the Almighty for their ally they slaughtered over nine thousand of the enemy, wounded and 
crippled the greater part of Nicanor’s army and put them all to flight. 

2Ma 8:25 The money of their prospective purchasers fell into their hands. After pursuing them for a good while, 
they turned back, since time was pressing: 

2Ma 8:26 it was the eve of the Sabbath, and for that reason they did not prolong their pursuit. 

2Ma 8:27 They collected the enemy’s weapons and stripped them of their spoils, and because of the Sabbath 
even more heartily blessed and praised the Lord, who had saved them and who had chosen that day for the first 
manifestation of his compassion. 

2Ma 8:28 When the Sabbath was over, they distributed some of the booty among the victims of the persecution 
and the widows and orphans; the rest they divided among themselves and their children. 

2Ma 8:29 They then joined in public supplication, imploring the merciful Lord to be fully reconciled with his 
servants. 

2Ma 8:30 They also challenged the forces of Timotheus and Bacchides and destroyed over twenty thousand of 
them, gaining possession of several high fortresses. They divided their enormous booty into two equal shares, 
one for themselves, the other for the victims of the persecution and the orphans and widows, not forgetting the 
aged. 

2Ma 8:31 They carefully collected the enemy’s weapons and stored them in suitable places. The rest of the 
spoils they took to Jerusalem. 

2Ma 8:32 They killed the tribal chieftain on Timotheus’ staff, an extremely wicked man who had done great harm 
to the Jews. 

2Ma 8:33 In the course of their victory celebrations in Jerusalem, they burned the men who had fired the Holy 
Gates; with Callisthenes they had taken refuge in one small house; so these received a fitting reward for their 
sacrilege. 

2Ma 8:34 The triple-dyed scoundrel Nicanor, who had brought the thousand merchants to buy the Jews, 

2Ma 8:35 finding himself with the Lord’s help humbled by men he had himself reckoned as of very little account, 
stripped off his robes of state, and made his way across country unaccompanied, like a runaway slave, reaching 
Antioch by a singular stroke of fortune, since his army had been destroyed. 

2Ma 8:36 Thus the man who had promised the Romans to make good their tribute money by selling the 
prisoners from Jerusalem, bore witness that the Jews had a defender and that they were in consequence 
invulnerable, since they followed the laws which that defender had ordained. 

2Ma 9:1 At about the same time, Antiochus was beating a disorderly retreat from Persia. 

2Ma 9:2 He had entered the city called Persepolis, planning to rob the temple and occupy the city; but the 
population at once sprang to arms to defend themselves, with the result that Antiochus was routed by the 
inhabitants and forced to beat a humiliating retreat. 

2Ma 9:3 On his arrival in Ecbatana he learned what had happened to Nicanor and to Timotheus’ forces. 

2Ma 9:4 Flying into a passion, he resolved to make the Jews pay for the disgrace inflicted by those who had 
routed him, and with this in mind he ordered his charioteer to drive without stopping and get the journey over. 

But the sentence of Heaven was already hanging over him. In his pride, he had said, “When I reach Jerusalem, I 
shall turn it into a mass grave for the Jews”. 

2Ma 9:5 But the all-seeing Lord, the God of Israel, struck him with an incurable and unseen complaint. The 
words were hardly out of his mouth when he was seized with an incurable pain in his bowels and with 
excruciating internal torture; 

2Ma 9:6 and this was only right, since he had inflicted many barbaric tortures on the bowels of others. 

2Ma 9:7 Even so, he in no way diminished his arrogance; still bursting with pride, breathing fire in his wrath 
against the Jews, he was in the act of ordering an even keener pace when the chariot gave a sudden lurch and 
out he fell and, in this serious fall, was dragged along, every joint of his body wrenched out of place. 

2Ma 9:8 He who only a little while before had thought in his superhuman boastfulness he could command the 
waves of the sea, he who had imagined he could weigh mountain peaks in a balance, found himself flat on the 



ground and then being carried in a litter, a visible demonstration to all of the power of God, 

2Ma 9:9 in that the very eyes of this godless man teemed with worms and his flesh rotted away while he 
lingered on in agonising pain, and the stench of his decay sickened the whole army. 

2Ma 9:10 A short while before, he had thought to grasp the stars of heaven; now no one could bring himself to 
act as his bearer, for the stench was intolerable. 

2Ma 9:1 1 Then and there, as a consequence, in his shattered state, he began to shed his excessive pride and 
come to his senses under the divine lash, spasms of pain overtaking him. 

2Ma 9:12 His stench being unbearable even to himself, he exclaimed, “It is right to submit to God; no mortal 
should aspire to equality with the Godhead”. 

2Ma 9:13 The wretch began to pray to the Master, who would never take pity on him now, declaring 

2Ma 9:14 that the holy city, towards which he had been speeding to rase it to the ground and turn it into a mass 

grave, should be declared free; 

2Ma 9:15 as for the Jews, whom he had considered as not even worth burying, so much carrion to be thrown 
out with their children for birds and beasts to prey on, he would give them all equal rights with the Athenians; 

2Ma 9:16 the holy Temple which he had once plundered he would now adorn with the finest offerings; he would 
restore all the sacred vessels many times over; he would defray from his personal revenue the expenses 
incurred for the sacrifices; 

2Ma 9:17 and, to crown all, he would himself turn Jew and visit every inhabited place, proclaiming the power of 
God. 

2Ma 9:18 Finding no respite at all from his suffering, God’s just sentence having overtaken him, he abandoned 
all hope for himself and wrote the Jews the letter transcribed below, which takes the form of an appeal in these 
terms: 

2Ma 9:19 “To the excellent Jews, to the citizens, Antiochus, king and commander-in-chief, sends hearty 
greetings, wishing them all health and prosperity. 

2Ma 9:20 “If you and your children are well and your affairs as you would wish, we are profoundly thankful. 

2Ma 9:21 For my part, I cherish affectionate memories of you. “On my return from the country of Persia I fell 
seriously ill, and thought it necessary to make provision for the common security of all. 

2Ma 9:22 Not that I despair of my condition, for I have great hope of shaking off the malady, 

2Ma 9:23 but considering how my father, whenever he was making an expedition into the uplands, would 
designate his successor 

2Ma 9:24 so that, in case of any unforeseen event or disquieting rumour, the people of the provinces might 
know to whom he had left the conduct of affairs, and thus remain undisturbed; 

2Ma 9:25 furthermore, being well aware that the sovereigns on our frontiers and the neighbours of our realm are 
watching for opportunities and waiting to see what will happen, I have designated as king my son Antiochus, 
whom I have more than once entrusted and commended to most of you when I was setting out for the upland 
satrapies; a transcript of my letter to him is appended hereto. 

2Ma 9:26 I therefore urge and require you, being mindful of the benefits both public and personal received from 
me, that you each persist in those sentiments of goodwill that you harbour towards me. 

2Ma 9:27 I am confident that he will pursue my own policy with benevolence and humanity, and will prove 
accommodating to your interests”. 

2Ma 9:28 And so this murderer and blasphemer, having endured sufferings as terrible as those which he had 
made others endure, met his pitiable fate, and ended his life in the mountains far from his home. 

2Ma 9:29 His comrade Philip brought back his body, and then, fearing Antiochus’ son, withdrew to Egypt, to the 
court of Ptolemy Philometor. 

2Ma 10:1 Maccabaeus and his companions, under the Lord’s guidance, restored the Temple and the city, 

2Ma 10:2 and pulled down the altars erected by the foreigners in the market place, as well as the shrines. 

2Ma 10:3 They purified the sanctuary and built another altar; then, striking fire from flints and using this fire, they 
offered the first sacrifice for two years, burning incense, lighting the lamps and setting out the loaves. 

2Ma 10:4 When they had done this, prostrating themselves on the ground, they implored the Lord never again 
to let them fall into such adversity, but if they should ever sin, to correct them with moderation and not to deliver 
them over to blasphemous and barbarous nations. 

2Ma 10:5 This day of the purification of the Temple fell on the very day on which the Temple had been profaned 
by the foreigners, the twenty-fifth of the same month, Chislev. 

2Ma 1 0:6 They kept eight festal days with rejoicing, in the manner of the feast of Shelters, remembering how, 
not long before at the time of the feast of Shelters, they had been living in the mountains and caverns like wild 
beasts. 

2Ma 10:7 Then, carrying thyrsuses, leafy boughs and palms, they offered hymns to him who had brought the 
cleansing of his own holy place to a happy outcome. 

2Ma 10:8 They also decreed by public edict, ratified by vote, that the whole Jewish nation should celebrate 



those same days every year. 

2Ma 10:9 Such were the circumstances attending the death of Antiochus styled Epiphanes. 

2Ma 10:10 Our task now is to unfold the history of Antiochus Eupator, son of that godless man, and briefly to 
relate the evil effects of the wars. 

2Ma 10:1 1 On coming to the throne, this prince put at the head of affairs a certain Lysias, the general officer 
commanding Coele-Syria and Phoenicia, 

2Ma 10:12 whereäs Ptolemy, known as Macron, and the first person to govern the Jews justly, had done his 
best to govern them peacefully to make up for the wrongs inflicted on them in the past. 

2Ma 10:13 Denounced, in consequence, to Eupator by the Friends of the King, he heard himself called traitor at 
every turn: for having abandoned Cyprus, which had been entrusted to him by Philometer, for having gone over 
to Antiochus Epiphanes, and for having shed no lustre on his illustrious office: he committed suicide by poisoning 
himself. 

2Ma 10:14 Gorgias now became general of the area; he maintained a force of mercenaries and a continual 
state of war with the Jews. 

2Ma 10:15 At the same time, the Idumaeans, who controlled important fortresses, were harassing the Jews, 
welcoming outlaws from Jerusalem and endeavouring to maintain a state of war. 

2Ma 10:16 Maccabaeus and his men, after making public supplication to God, entreating him to support them, 
began operations against the Idumaean fortresses. 

2Ma 10:17 Vigorously pressing home their attack, they seized possession of these vantage points, beating off 
all who fought on the ramparts; they slaughtered all who fell into their hands, accounting for no fewer than twenty 
thousand. 

2Ma 10:18 Nine thousand at least took refuge in two exceptionally strong towers with everything they needed to 
withstand a siege, 

2Ma 10:19 whereupon, Maccabaeus left Simon and Joseph, with Zacchaeus and his forces, in sufficient 
numbers to besiege them, and himself went off to other places requiring his attention. 

2Ma 10:20 But Simon’s men were greedy for money and allowed themselves to be bribed by some of the men 
in the towers; accepting seventy thousand drachmas, they let a number of them escape. 

2Ma 10:21 When Maccabaeus was told what had happened, he summoned the people’s commanders and 
accused the offenders of having sold their brothers for money by releasing their enemies to fight them. 

2Ma 10:22 Having executed them as traitors, he at once proceeded to capture both towers. 

2Ma 10:23 Successful in all that he undertook by force of arms, in these two fortresses he slaughtered more 
than twenty thousand men. 

2Ma 10:24 Timotheus, who had been beaten by the Jews once before, now assembled an enormous force of 
mercenaries, mustering cavalry from Asia in considerable numbers, and soon appeared in Judaea, expecting to 
conquer it by force of arms. 

2Ma 10:25 At his approach, Maccabaeus and his men made their supplications to God, sprinkling earth on their 
heads and putting sackcloth round their waists. 

2Ma 10:26 Prostrating themselves on the terrace before the altar, they begged him to support them and to show 
himself the enemy of their enemies, the adversary of their adversaries, as the Law clearly states. 

2Ma 10:27 After these prayers, they armed themselves and advanced a fair distance from the city, halting when 
they were close to the enemy. 

2Ma 1 0:28 As the first light of dawn began to spread, the two sides joined battle, the one having as their pledge 
of success and victory not only their own valour but their recourse to the Lord, the other making their own ardour 
their mainstay in the fight. 

2Ma 10:29 When the battle was at its height, the enemy saw five magnificent men appear from heaven on 
horses with golden bridles and put themselves at the head of the Jews; 

2Ma 10:30 surrounding Maccabaeus and screening him with their own armour, they kept him unscathed, while 
they rained arrows and thunderbolts on the enemy until, blinded and confused, they scattered in complete 
disorder. 

2Ma 10:31 Twenty thousand five hundred infantry and six hundred cavalry were slaughtered. 

2Ma 10:32 Timotheus himself fled to a strongly guarded citadel called Gezer, where Chaereas was in 
command. 

2Ma 1 0:33 For four days Maccabaeus and his men eagerly besieged the fortress, 

2Ma 10:34 while the defenders, confident in the security of the place, hurled fearful blasphemies and godless 
insults at them. 

2Ma 10:35 At daybreak on the fifth day, twenty young men of Maccabaeus’ forces, fired with indignation at the 
blasphemies, manfully assaulted the wall, with wild courage cutting down everyone they encountered. 

2Ma 1 0:36 Others, in a similar scaling operation, took the defenders in the rear, and set fire to the towers, 
lighting pyres on which they burned the blasphemers alive. The first, meanwhile, breaking open the gates, let the 



rest of the army in and, at their head, captured the town. 

2Ma 10:37 Timotheus had hidden in a storage-well, but they killed him, with his brother Chaereas, and 
Apollophanes. 

2Ma 10:38 When all this was over, with hymns and thanksgiving they blessed the Lord, who had shown such 
great kindness to Israel and given them the victory. 

2Ma 11:1 Almost immediately afterwards, Lysias, the king’s tutor and cousin, chief minister of the realm, much 
disturbed at the turn of events, 

2Ma 1 1 :2 mustered about eighty thousand foot soldiers and his entire cavalry and advanced against the Jews, 
intending to make the city a place for Greeks to live in, 

2Ma 1 1 :3 to levy a tax on the Temple as on other national shrines, and to put the office of high priest up for sale 
every year; 

2Ma 1 1 :4 he took no account at all of the power of God, being sublimely confident in his tens of thousands of 
infantrymen, his thousands of cavalry, and his eighty elephants. 

2Ma 1 1 :5 Invading Judaea, he approached Beth-Zur, a fortified position about twenty miles from Jerusalem, and 
began to subject it to strong pressure. 

2Ma 1 1 :6 When Maccabaeus and his men learned that Lysias was besieging the fortresses, they and the 
populace with them begged the Lord with lamentation and tears to send a good angel to save Israel. 

2Ma 1 1 :7 Maccabaeus himself was the first to take up his weapons, and he urged the rest to risk their lives with 
him in support of their brothers; so they sallied out resolutely, as one man. 

2Ma 1 1 :8 They were still near Jerusalem when a rider attired in white appeared at their head, brandishing 
golden weapons. 

2Ma 1 1 :9 With one accord they all blessed the God of mercy, and found themselves filled with such courage 
that they were ready to lay low not men only but the fiercest beasts and walls of iron. 

2Ma 11:10 They advanced in battle order with the aid of their celestial ally, the Lord having had mercy on them. 
2Ma 11:11 Charging like lions on the enemy, they laid low eleven thousand of the infantry and sixteen hundred 
horsemen, and routed all the rest. 

2Ma 11:12 Of those, the majority got away, wounded and weaponless. Lysias himself escaped only by 
ignominious flight. 

2Ma 11:13 Now Lysias was not lacking in intelligence and, as he reflected on the reverse he had just suffered, 
he realised that the Hebrews were invincible because the mighty God fought for them. He therefore sent them a 
delegation 

2Ma 11:14 to persuade them to accept reasonable terms all round, and promised to compel the king to become 
their friend. 

2Ma 11:15 Maccabaeus, thinking only of the common good, agreed to all that Lysias proposed, and whatever 
Maccabaeus submitted to Lysias in writing concerning the Jews was granted by the king. 

2Ma 11:16 Here is the text of the letter Lysias wrote to the Jews: “Lysias to the Jewish people, greetings. 

2Ma 11:17 “John and Absalom, your envoys, have delivered to me the communication transcribed below, 
requesting me to approve its provisions. 

2Ma 11:18 Anything requiring the king’s attention I have put before him; whatever was possible, I have granted. 
2Ma 11:19 Provided you maintain your goodwill towards the interests of the State, I shall do my best in the 
future to promote your well-being. 

2Ma 1 1 :20 As regards the details, I have given orders for your envoys and my own officials to discuss these 
with you. 

2Ma 1 1 :21 May you prosper. “The twenty-fourth day of Dioscorus, in the year one hundred and forty-eight”. 

2Ma 1 1 :22 The king’s letter ran as follows: “King Antiochus to his brother Lysias, greetings. 

2Ma 1 1 :23 “Now that our father has taken his place among the gods, our will is that the subjects of the realm be 
left undisturbed to attend to their own affairs. 

2Ma 1 1 :24 We understand that the Jews do not approve our father’s policy, the adoption of Greek customs, but 
prefer their own way of life and ask to be allowed to observe their own laws. 

2Ma 1 1 :25 Accordingly, since we intend this people to be free from vexation like any other, our ruling is that the 
Temple be restored to them and that they conduct their affairs according to the customs of their ancestors. 

2Ma 1 1 :26 “It will therefore be your concern to send them a mission of friendship, so that on learning our policy 
they may have confidence and happily go about their business”. 

2Ma 1 1 :27 The king’s letter to the Jewish nation was in these terms: “King Antiochus to the Jewish Senate and 
the rest of the Jews, greetings. 

2Ma 1 1 :28 “If you are well, that is as we would wish; we ourselves are in good health. 

2Ma 1 1 :29 “Menelaus informs us that you wish to return home and attend to your own affairs. 

2Ma 1 1 :30 Accordingly, all those who return before the thirtieth day of Xanthicus may rest assured that they 
have nothing to fear. 



2Ma 1 1 :31 The Jews may make use of their own kind of food and their own laws as formerly, and none of them 
is to be molested in any way for any unwitting offences. 

2Ma 1 1 :32 I am in fact sending Menelaus to set your minds at rest. 

2Ma 1 1 :33 Farewell. The fifteenth day of Xanthicus in the year one hundred and forty-eight”. 

2Ma 1 1 :34 The Romans also sent the Jews a letter, which read as follows: “Quintus Memmius, Titus Manilius, 
Manius Sergius, legates of the Romans, to the people of the Jews, greetings. 

2Ma 1 1 :35 “Whatever Lysias, the king’s Cousin, has granted you we also approve. 

2Ma 1 1 :36 As for the matters he decided to refer to the king, consider them carefully and send someöne without 
delay, if we are to interpret them to your advantage, because we are leaving for Antioch. 

2Ma 1 1 :37 Lose no time, therefore, in sending us those who can tell us what your intentions are. 

2Ma 1 1 :38 Farewell. “The fifteenth day of Dioscorus in the year one hundred and forty-eight”. 

2Ma 12:1 These agreements once concluded, Lysias returned to the king and the Jews went back to their 
farming. 

2Ma 12:2 Among the local generals, Timotheus and Apollonius son of Gennaeus, as also Hieronymus and 
Demophon, and Nicanor the Cypriarch as well, would not allow the Jews to live in peace and quiet. 

2Ma 12:3 The people of Joppa committed a particularly wicked crime: they invited the Jews living among them 
to go aboard some boats they had lying ready, taking their wives and children. There was no hint of any intention 
to harm them; 

2Ma 12:4 there had been a public vote by the citizens, and the Jews accepted, as well they might, being 
peaceable people with no reason to suspect anything. But once out in the open sea they were all sent to the 
bottom, a company of at least two hundred. 

2Ma 12:5 When Judas heard of the cruel fate of his countrymen, he issued his orders to his men 

2Ma 12:6 and after invoking God, the just judge, he attacked his brothers’ murderers. Linder cover of dark he 

set fire to the port, burned the boats and put to the sword everyone who had taken refuge there. 

2Ma 12:7 As the town gates were closed, he withdrew, intending to come back and wipe out the whole 
community of Joppa. 

2Ma 12:8 But hearing that the people of Jamnia were planning to treat their resident Jews in the same way, 

2Ma 1 2:9 he made a night attack on the Jamnites and fired the port with its fleet; the glow of the flames was 
seen as far off as Jerusalem, thirty miles away. 

2Ma 12:10 When they had left the town barely a mile behind them in their advance on Timotheus, Judas was 
attacked by an Arab force of at least five thousand foot soldiers, with five hundred cavalry. 

2Ma 12:1 1 A fierce engagement followed, and with God’s help Judas’ men won the day; the defeated nomads 
begged Judas to offer them the right hand of friendship, and promised to surrender their herds and make 
themselves generally useful to him. 

2Ma 12:12 Realising that they might indeed prove valuable in many ways, Judas consented to make peace with 
them and after an exchange of pledges the Arabs withdrew to their tents. 

2Ma 12:13 Judas also attacked a certain fortified town, closed by ramparts and inhabited by a medley of races; 
its name was Caspin. 

2Ma 12:14 Confident in the strength of their walls and their stock of provisions, the besieged adopted an 
insolent attitude to Judas and his men, reinforcing their insults with blasphemies and profanity. 

2Ma 12:15 But Judas and his men invoked the great Sovereign of the world who without battering-ram or siege- 
engine had overthrown Jericho in the days of Joshua; they then made a fierce assault on the wall. 

2Ma 12:16 By God’s will, having captured the town, they made such indescribable slaughter that the nearby 
lake, a quarter of a mile across, seemed filled to overflowing with blood. 

2Ma 12:17 Ninety-five miles further on from there, they reached the Charax, in the country of Jews known as 
Tubians. 

2Ma 12:18 They did not find Timotheus himself in that neighbourhood; he had already left the district, having 
achieved nothing apart from leaving a very strong garrison at one point. 

2Ma 12:19 Dositheus and Sosipater, two of the Maccabaean generals, marched out and destroyed the force 
Timotheus had left behind in the fortress, amounting to more than ten thousand men. 

2Ma 12:20 Maccabaeus himself divided his army into cohorts to which he assigned commanders, and then 
hurried in pursuit of Timotheus, whose troops numbered one hundred and twenty thousand infantry and two 
thousand five hundred cavalry. 

2Ma 12:21 Timotheus’ first move on learning of Judas’ advance was to send away the women and children and 
the rest of the baggage train to the place called the Carnaim, since it was an impregnable position, difficult of 
access owing to the narrowness of all the approaches. 

2Ma 12:22 Judas’ cohort came into sight first. The enemy, seized with fright and panic-stricken by the 
manifestation of the All-seeing, began to flee, one running this way, one running that, often wounding one 
another in consequence and running on the points of one another’s swords. 



2Ma 12:23 Judas pursued them with a will, cutting the sinners to pieces and killing something like thirty 
thousand men. 

2Ma 12:24 Timotheus himself, having fallen into the hands of Dositheus and Sosipater and their men, very 
craftily pleaded with them to let him go with his life, on the grounds that he had the relatives and even the 
brothers of many of them in his power, and that these could otherwise expect short shrift. 

2Ma 12:25 When at long last he convinced them that he would honour his promise and return these people safe 
and sound, they let him go for the sake of saving their brothers. 

2Ma 12:26 Reaching the Carnaim and the Atargateion, Judas slaughtered twenty-five thousand men. 

2Ma 12:27 Having defeated and destroyed them, he led his army against Ephron, a fortified town, where 
Lysanias was living. Stalwart young men drawn up outside the walls offered vigorous resistance, while inside 
there were quantities of war-engines and missiles in reserve. 

2Ma 12:28 But the Jews, having invoked the Sovereign who by his power shatters enemies’ defences, gained 
control of the town and cut down nearly twenty-five thousand of the people inside. 

2Ma 12:29 Moving off from there, they pressed on to Scythopolis, 

2Ma 12:30 seventy-five miles from Jerusalem. But as the Jews who had settled there assured Judas that the 
people of Scythopolis had always treated them well and had been particularly kind to them when times were at 
their worst, 

2Ma 12:31 he and his men thanked them and urged them to extend the same friendship to his race in the future. 
They reached Jerusalem shortly before the feast of Weeks. 

2Ma 12:32 After Pentecost, as it is called, they marched against Gorgias, the general commanding Idumaea. 
2Ma 12:33 He came out at the head of three thousand infantry and four hundred cavalry; 

2Ma 12:34 in the course of the ensuing battle a few Jews lost their lives. 

2Ma 12:35 A man called Dositheus, a horseman of the Tubian contingent, a valiant man, overpowered Gorgias 
and, gripping him by the cloak, was forcibly dragging him along, intending to take the accursed man alive, but 
one of the Thracian cavalry, hurling himself on Dositheus, slashed his shoulder, and Gorgias escaped to Marisa. 
2Ma 12:36 Meanwhile, since Esdrias and his men had been fighting for a long time and were exhausted, Judas 
called on the Lord to show himself their ally and leader in battle. 

2Ma 12:37 Then, chanting the battle cry and hymns at the top of his voice in his ancestral tongue, by a surprise 
attack he routed Gorgias’ troops. 

2Ma 12:38 Judas then rallied his army and moved on to the town of Adullam where, as it was the seventh day of 
the week, they purified themselves according to custom and kept the Sabbath. 

2Ma 12:39 Next day, they came to find Judas (since the necessity was by now urgent) to have the bodies of the 
fallen taken up and laid to rest among their relatives in their ancestral tombs. 

2Ma 12:40 But when they found on each of the dead men, under their tunics, objects dedicated to the idols of 
Jamnia, which the Law prohibits to Jews, it became clear to everyone that this was why these men had lost their 
lives. 

2Ma 12:41 All then blessed the ways of the Lord, the upright judge who brings hidden things to light, 

2Ma 12:42 and gave themselves to prayer, begging that the sin committed might be completely forgiven. Next, 
the valiant Judas urged the soldiers to keep themselves free from all sin, having seen with their own eyes the 
effects of the sin of those who had fallen; 

2Ma 12:43 after this he took a collection from them individually, amounting to nearly two thousand drachmas, 
and sent it to Jerusalem to have a sacrifice for sin offered, an action altogether fine and noble, prompted by his 
belief in the resurrection. 

2Ma 12:44 For had he not expected the fallen to rise again, it would have been superfluous and foolish to pray 
for the dead, 

2Ma 12:45 whereäs if he had in view the splendid recompense reserved for those who make a pious end, the 
thought was holy and devout. Hence, he had this expiatory sacrifice offered for the dead, so that they might be 
released from their sin. 

2Ma 13:1 In the year one hundred and forty-nine, Judas and his men discovered that Antiochus Eupatorwas 
advancing in force against Judaea, 

2Ma 1 3:2 and with him Lysias his tutor and chief minister; he had moreover a Greek force of one hundred and 
ten thousand infantry, five thousand three hundred cavalry, twenty-two elephants, and three hundred chariots 
fitted with scythes. 

2Ma 1 3:3 Menelaus, too, joined them and very craftily kept urging Antiochus on, not for the welfare of his own 
country but in the hope of being restored to office. 

2Ma 13:4 But the King of kings stirred up the anger of Antiochus against the guilty wretch, and when Lysias 
made it clear to the king that Menelaus was the cause of all the troubles, Antiochus gave orders for him to be 
taken to Beroea and there put to death by the local method of execution. 

2Ma 13:5 In that place there is a tower fifty cubits high, full of ash, with an internal lip all round overhanging the 



ashes. 

2Ma 1 3:6 If anyone is convicted of sacrilegious theft or of some other heinous crime, he is taken up to the top 
and pushed over to perish. 

2Ma 13:7 In such a manner was the renegade fated to die; Menelaus had not even the privilege of burial. 

2Ma 13:8 Deserved justice, this; since he had committed many sins against the altar, the fire and ashes of 
which were holy, it was in ashes that he met his death. 

2Ma 13:9 The king, then, was advancing, his mind filled with barbarous designs, to give the Jews a 
demonstration of far worse things than anything that had happened under his father. 

2Ma 13:10 When Judas heard of this, he ordered the people day and night to call on the Lord as never before, 
to come to the help of those who were in peril of being deprived of the Law, their fatherland and the holy Temple, 
2Ma 13:1 1 and not to allow the people, just when they were beginning to breathe again, to fall into the power of 
ill-famed foreigners. 

2Ma 13:12 When they had all, with one voice, obeyed his instructions and had made their petitions to the 
merciful Lord, weeping, fasting and prostrating themselves for three days continuously, Judas spoke words of 
encouragement and told them to keep close to him. 

2Ma 13:13 After separate consultation with the elders, he resolved not to wait for the king’s army to invade 
Judaea and take possession of the city, but to march out and settle the whole matter with the Lord’s help. 

2Ma 13:14 Having thus committed the outcome to the Creator of the world, and having exhorted his soldiers to 
fight bravely to the death for the laws, the Temple, the city, their country and their way of life, he encamped his 
army near Modein. 

2Ma 13:15 Giving his men the password “Victory from God”, he made a night attack on the king’s pavilion with a 
picked band of the bravest young men. Inside the camp he destroyed about two thousand, and his men cut 
down the largest of the elephants with its mahout; 

2Ma 13:16 having eventually filled the camp with terror and confusion, they successfully withdrew, 

2Ma 13:17 just as dawn was breaking. This was achieved, thanks to the protection which the Lord granted 
Judas. 

2Ma 13:18 The king, having had a taste of Jewish daring, now tried to capture their positions by trickery. 

2Ma 13:19 He advanced on Beth-Zur, a strong fortress of the Jews, but was checked, overcome and so 
repulsed. 

2Ma 13:20 Judas supplied the garrison with what they needed, 

2Ma 13:21 but Rhodocus, of the Jewish army, supplied the enemy with secret information; the man was 
identified, arrested, and dealt with. 

2Ma 13:22 A second time, the king parleyed with the garrison of Beth-Zur; he offered and accepted pledges of 
friendship, retired, then attacked Judas and his men, but lost the battle. 

2Ma 1 3:23 He was then told that Philip, left in charge of affairs, had rebelled in Antioch. He was stunned by this, 
opened negotiations with the Jews, came to an agreement, and swore to abide by all reasonable conditions. 
Agreement reached, he offered a sacrifice, honoured the Temple, and made generous gifts to the holy place. 
2Ma 13:24 He received Maccabaeus kindly and, leaving Hegemonides to exercise command from Ptolemais to 
the territory of the Gerrenians, 

2Ma 1 3:25 went to Ptolemais. The inhabitants of the place disapproved of the treaty; they complained furiously 
and wanted to annul its provisions. 

2Ma 13:26 Lysias mounted the rostrum and made a convincing defence of the provisions which convinced and 
calmed them and won their goodwill. He then withdrew to Antioch. So much for the episode of the king’s 
offensive and retreat. 

2Ma 14:1 Three years after this, Judas and his men learned that Demetrius son of Seleucus had landed at the 
port of Tripolis with a strong army and a fleet, 

2Ma 14:2 and that he had occupied the country and had killed Antiochus and his tutor Lysias. 

2Ma 14:3 A certain Alcimus, a former high priest, had wilfully incurred defilement at the time of the insurrection; 
realising that whichever way he turned there was no security for him, nor any further access to the holy altar, 

2Ma 14:4 he went to King Demetrius in about the year one hundred and fifty-one and presented him with a 
golden crown and a palm, together with the traditional olive branches from the Temple; there, for that day, he let 
the matter rest. 

2Ma 14:5 Presently he found an opportunity to further his mad plan. When Demetrius called him into his council 
and questioned him about the dispositions and intentions of the Jews, he replied, 

2Ma 14:6 “Those Jews called Hasidaeans, who are led by Judas Maccabaeus, are war-mongers and rebels who 
are preventing the kingdom from finding stability. 

2Ma 14:7 That is why, after being deprived of my hereditary dignity — 1 mean the high priesthood — 1 have come 
here now, 

2Ma 14:8 first out of genuine concern for the king’s interests, and secondly, out of a regard for our own fellow- 



citizens, because the irresponsible behaviour of those I have mentioned has brought no slight misery on our 
entire race. 

2Ma 14:9 When your majesty has taken note of all these points, may it please you to make provision for the 
welfare of our country and our oppressed nation, as befits the gracious benevolence you extend to all; 

2Ma 14:10 for, as long as Judas remains alive, the State will never enjoy peace”. 

2Ma 14:11 No sooner had he spoken thus than the rest of the King’s Friends, who were hostile to Judas’ 
activities, stoked Demetrius’ anger. 

2Ma 14:12 The latter at once selected Nicanor, then commander of the elephants, promoted him to the 
command of Judaea and despatched him 

2Ma 14:13 with instructions to dispose of Judas, disperse his followers and instal Alcimus as high priest of the 
greatest of temples. 

2Ma 14:14 The foreigners in Judaea, who had fled before Judas, flocked to join Nicanor, thinking that the 
misfortunes and troubles of the Jews would be to their own advantage. 

2Ma 14:15 When the Jews heard that Nicanor was coming and that the foreigners were about to attack, they 
sprinkled dust over themselves and made supplication to him who had established his people for ever and who 
never failed to support his own heritage by direct manifestations. 

2Ma 14:16 On their leader’s orders, they at once left the place where they were and confronted the enemy at 
the village of Dessau. 

2Ma 14:17 Simon, brother of Judas, engaged Nicanor but, owing to the sudden arrival of the enemy, suffered a 
slight reverse. 

2Ma 14:18 Nicanor, however, had heard how brave Judas and his men were and how resolutely they always 
fought for their country, and he did not dare allow bloodshed to decide the issue. 

2Ma 14:19 And so he sent Posidonius, Theodotus and Mattathias to offer the Jews pledges of friendship and to 
accept theirs. 

2Ma 14:20 After careful consideration of his terms, the leader communicated them to his troops, and since they 
were all clearly of one mind they agreed to the treaty. 

2Ma 14:21 A day was fixed on which the respective leaders were to meet as individuals. A litter came out from 
either side and seats were set up. 

2Ma 14:22 Judas had posted armed men in strategic positions, in case of a sudden treacherous move by the 
enemy. The leaders held their conference and reached agreement. 

2Ma 14:23 Nicanor took up residence in Jerusalem and did nothing out of place there; indeed, he sent away the 
crowds that had flocked to join him. 

2Ma 14:24 He kept Judas constantly with him, becoming deeply attached to him 

2Ma 14:25 and encouraged him to marry and have children. Judas married, settled down and led a normal life. 
2Ma 14:26 When Alcimus saw how friendly the two men had become, he went to Demetrius with a copy of the 
treaty they had signed and told him that Nicanor was harbouring thoughts against the interests of the State, and 
was planning that Judas, an enemy of the realm, should fill the next vacancy among the Friends of the King. 

2Ma 14:27 The king flew into a rage; roused by the slanders of this villain, he wrote to Nicanor, telling him of his 
strong displeasure at these agreements and ordering him immediately to send Maccabaeus to Antioch in chains. 
2Ma 14:28 When the letter reached Nicanor, he was very much upset, for he disliked the prospect of breaking 
an agreement with a man who had done nothing wrong. 

2Ma 14:29 Since, however, there was no way of opposing the king, he waited for an opportunity to carry out the 
order by a stratagem. 

2Ma 14:30 Maccabaeus began to notice that Nicanor was treating him more sharply and that his manner of 
speaking to him was more abrupt than it had been, and he concluded that such sharpness could have no very 
good motive. He therefore collected a considerable number of his followers and got away from Nicanor. 

2Ma 14:31 The latter, realising that the man had well and truly outmanoeuvred him, went to the greatest and 
holiest of Temples when the priests were offering the customary sacrifices, and ordered them to surrender 
Judas. 

2Ma 14:32 When they protested on oath that they did not know where the wanted man could be, 

2Ma 14:33 he stretched out his right hand towards the Temple and swore this oath, “If you do not hand Judas 
over to me as prisoner, I shall rase this dwelling of God to the ground, I shall demolish the altar, and on this very 
spot I shall erect a splendid temple to Dionysus”. 

2Ma 14:34 With these words he left them. The priests stretched out their hands to heaven, calling on him who 
has at all times done battle for our nation; this was their prayer: 

2Ma 14:35 “O Lord in need of nothing, it has pleased you that the Temple where you dwell should be here with 
us. 

2Ma 14:36 Now, therefore, holy Lord of all holiness, preserve for ever from all profanation this House, so newly 
purified”. 



2Ma 14:37 Now, a man called Razis, one of the elders of Jerusalem, was denounced to Nicanor. He was a man 
who loved his countrymen and stood high in their esteem, and he was known as the father of the Jews because 
of his kindness. 

2Ma 14:38 In the earlier days of the insurrection he had been convicted of Judaism, and he had risked both life 
and limb for Judaism with the utmost zeal. 

2Ma 1 4:39 Nicanor, by way of demonstrating the enmity he had for the Jews, sent over five hundred soldiers to 
arrest him, 

2Ma 14:40 reckoning that if he eliminated this man he would be dealing them a severe blow. 

2Ma 14:41 When the troops were on the point of capturing the tower and were forcing the outer door and calling 
for fire to set the doors alight, Razis, finding himself completely surrounded, fell on his own sword, 

2Ma 14:42 nobly resolving to die rather than fall into the clutches of these villains and suffer outrages unworthy 
of his noble birth. 

2Ma 14:43 But in the heat of conflict he missed his thrust, and while the troops swarmed in through the 
doorways, he ran nimbly upstairs to the parapet and manfully threw himself down among the troops. 

2Ma 14:44 But, as they immediately drew back, he fell into the middle of the empty space. 

2Ma 14:45 Still breathing, and blazing with anger, he struggled to his feet, blood spurting in all directions, and 
despite his terrible wounds ran right through the crowd; then, taking his stand on a steep rock, 

2Ma 14:46 although he had now lost every drop of blood, he tore out his entrails and taking them in both hands 
flung them down on the crowd, calling on the Master of his life and spirit to give them back to him one day. Thus 
he died. 

2Ma 15:1 Nicanor heard that Judas and his men were in the neighbourhood of Samaria, so he decided to attack 
them, at no risk to himself, on the day of rest. 

2Ma 15:2 Those Jews who had been compelled to follow him, said, “Do not massacre them in such a savage, 
barbarous way. Respect the day on which the All-seeing has conferred a special holiness”. 

2Ma 15:3 At this the triple-dyed scoundrel asked if there were in heaven a sovereign who had ordered the 
keeping of the Sabbath day. 

2Ma 15:4 When they answered, “The living Lord himself, the Heavenly Sovereign, has ordered the observance 
of the seventh day”, 

2Ma 15:5 he retorted, “And I, as sovereign on earth, order you to take up arms and do the king’s business”. For 
all that, he did not manage to carry out his wicked plan. 

2Ma 15:6 While Nicanor, in his unlimited boastfulness and pride, was planning to erect a general trophy with the 
spoils taken from Judas and his men, 

2Ma 15:7 Maccabaeus remained firm in his confident conviction that the Lord would stand by him. 

2Ma 15:8 He urged his men not to be dismayed by the foreigners’ attacks but, keeping in mind the help that had 
come to them from Heaven in the past, to be confident that this time too victory would be theirs with the help of 
the Almighty. 

2Ma 15:9 He put fresh heart into them by citing the Law and the Prophets and, by stirring up memories of the 
battles they had already won, he filled them with new enthusiasm. 

2Ma 15:10 Having thus aroused their courage, he ended his exhortation by demonstrating the treachery of the 
foreigners and how they had violated their oaths. 

2Ma 15:1 1 Having armed each one of them not so much with the safety given by shield and lance as with that 
confidence which springs from noble language, he encouraged them all by describing to them a convincing 
dream — a vision, as it were. 

2Ma 15:12 What he had seen was this: Onias, the former high priest, that paragon of men, modest of bearing 
and gentle of manners, suitably eloquent and trained from boyhood in the practice of every virtue — Onias was 
stretching out his hands and praying for the whole Jewish community. 

2Ma 15:13 Next, there appeared a man equally remarkable for his great age and dignity and invested with a 
marvellous and impressive air of majesty. 

2Ma 15:14 Onias began to speak: “This is a man”, he said, “who loves his brothers and prays much for the 
people and the holy city-Jeremiah, the prophet of God”. 

2Ma 15:15 Jeremiah then stretched out his right hand and presented Judas with a golden sword, saying as he 
gave it, 

2Ma 15:16 “Take this holy sword as a gift from God; with it you will shatter the enemy”. 

2Ma 15:17 Encouraged by the noble words of Judas, which had the power to inspire valour and give the young 
the spirit of mature men, they decided not to entrench themselves in a camp, but bravely to take the offensive 
and, in hand-to-hand fighting, to commit the result to the fortune of war, since the city, their holy religion and the 
Temple were in danger. 

2Ma 15:18 Their concern for their wives and children, their brothers and relatives, had shrunk to minute 
importance; their chief and greatest fear was for the consecrated Temple. 



2Ma 15:19 Those left behind in the city felt a similar anxiety, alarmed as they were about the forthcoming 
encounter in the open country. 

2Ma 15:20 Everyone now awaited the coming issue. The enemy had already concentrated their forces and 
stood formed up in order of battle, with the elephants drawn up in a strategic position and the cavalry disposed 
on the wings. 

2Ma 15:21 Maccabaeus took note of these masses confronting him, the glittering array of armour and the fierce 
aspect of the elephants; then, raising his hands to heaven, he called on the Lord who works miracles, in the 
knowledge that it is not by force of arms but as he sees fit to decide, that victory is granted by him to such as 
deserve it. 

2Ma 15:22 His prayer was worded thus: “You, Master, sent your angel in the days of Hezekiah king of Judaea, 
and he destroyed no less than one hundred and eighty-five thousand of Sennacherib’s army; 

2Ma 15:23 now, once again, Sovereign of heaven, send a good angel before us to spread terror and dismay. 
2Ma 15:24 May these men be struck down by the might of your arm, since they have come with blasphemy on 
their lips to attack your holy people”. And on these words he finished. 

2Ma 15:25 Nicanor and his men advanced to the sound of trumpets and war songs, 

2Ma 15:26 but the men of Judas closed with the enemy uttering invocations and prayers. 

2Ma 15:27 Fighting with their hands and praying to God in their hearts, they cut down at least thirty-five 
thousand men and were greatly cheered by this manifestation of God. 

2Ma 15:28 When the engagement was over and they were withdrawing in triumph, they recognised Nicanor, 
lying dead in full armour. 

2Ma 15:29 With shouting and confusion all around, they blessed the sovereign Master in their ancestral tongue. 
2Ma 15:30 He who, as protagonist, had devoted himself, body and soul, to his fellow-citizens, and had 
preserved the love he felt even in youth for those of his own race, gave orders for Nicanor’s head to be cut off, 
with his arm up to the shoulder, and taken to Jerusalem. 

2Ma 15:31 When he arrived there himself, he called his countrymen together, stationed the priests in front of the 
altar and then sent for the people from the Citadel. 

2Ma 15:32 He showed them the head of the abominable Nicanor, and the hand which this infamous man had 
stretched out so insolently against the holy House of the Almighty. 

2Ma 1 5:33 Then, cutting out godless Nicanor’s tongue, he gave orders for it to be fed piecemeal to the birds, 
and for the salary of his folly to be hung up in front of the Temple. 

2Ma 15:34 At this, everyone sent blessings heavenwards to the glorious Lord, saying, “Blessed be he who has 
preserved his holy place from pollution!”. 

2Ma 15:35 He hung Nicanor’s head from the Citadel, a clear and evident sign to all of the help of the Lord. 

2Ma 15:36 They all decreed by public vote never to let that day go by unobserved, but to celebrate the 
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, called Adar in Aramaic, the eve of what is called the Day of Mordecai. 

2Ma 15:37 So ends the episode of Nicanor, and as, since then, the city has remained in the possession of the 
Hebrews, I shall bring my own work to an end here too. 

2Ma 15:38 If it is well composed and to the point, that is just what I wanted. If it is worthless and mediocre, that 
is all I could manage. 

2Ma 15:39 Just as it is injurious to drink wine by itself, or again water alone, whereäs wine mixed with water is 
pleasant and produces a delightful sense of well-being, so skill in presenting the incidents is what delights the 
understanding of those who read the book. And here I close. 


Psa 1:1 How blessed is anyone who rejects the advice of the wicked and does not take a stand in the path that 
sinners tread, nor a seat in company with cynics, 

Psa 1 :2 but who delights in the law of Yahweh and murmurs his law day and night. 

Psa 1 :3 Such a one is like a tree planted near streams; it bears fruit in season and its leaves never wither, and 
every project succeeds. 

Psa 1 :4 How different the wicked, how different! Just like chaff blown around by the wind 

Psa 1 :5 the wicked will not stand firm at the Judgement nor sinners in the gathering of the upright. 

Psa 1 :6 For Yahweh watches over the path of the upright, but the path of the wicked is doomed. 

Psa 2:1 Why this uproar among the nations, this impotent muttering of the peoples? 

Psa 2:2 Kings of the earth take up position, princes plot together against Yahweh and his anointed, 

Psa 2:3 “Now let us break their fetters! Now let us throw off their bonds!”. 

Psa 2:4 He who is enthroned in the heavens laughs, Yahweh makes a mockery of them, 

Psa 2:5 then in his anger rebukes them, in his rage he strikes them with terror. 

Psa 2:6 “I myself have anointed my king on Zion my holy mountain”. 

Psa 2:7 I will proclaim the decree of Yahweh: He said to me, “You are my son, today have I fathered you. 

Psa 2:8 Ask of me, and I shall give you the nations as your birthright, the whole wide world as your possession. 
Psa 2:9 With an iron sceptre you will break them, shatter them like so many pots”. 

Psa 2:10 So now, you kings, come to your senses, you earthly rulers, learn your lesson! 

Psa 2:11 In fear be submissive to Yahweh; 

Psa 2:12 with trembling kiss his feet, lest he be angry and your way come to nothing, for his fury flares up in a 
moment. How blessed are all who take refuge in him! 

Psa 3:1 [Psalm Of David When he was fleeing from his son Absalom] Yahweh, how countless are my enemies, 
how countless those who rise up against me, 

Psa 3:2 how countless those who say of me, “No salvation for him from his Godl'Pause 
Psa 3:3 But you, Yahweh, the shield at my side, my glory, you hold my head high. 

Psa 3:4 I cry out to Yahweh; he answers from his holy mountain. Pause 

Psa 3:5 As for me, if I lie down and sleep, I shall awake, for Yahweh sustains me. 

Psa 3:6 I have no fear of people in their thousands upon thousands, who range themselves against me 
wherever I turn. 

Psa 3:7 Arise, Yahweh, rescue me, my God! You strike all my foes across the face, you break the teeth of the 
wicked. 

Psa 3:8 In Yahweh is salvation, on your people, your blessing!Pause 

Psa 4:1 [For the choirmaster For strings Psalm Of David] When I call, answer me, God, upholder of my right. In 
my distress you have set me at large; take pity on me and hear my prayer! 

Psa 4:2 Children of men, how long will you be heavy of heart, why love what is vain and chase after 
illusions?Pause 

Psa 4:3 Realise that Yahweh performs wonders for his faithful, Yahweh listens when I call to him. 

Psa 4:4 Be careful not to sin, speak in your hearts, and on your beds keep silence. Pause 



Psa 4:5 Loyally offer sacrifices, and trust in Yahweh. 

Psa 4:6 Many keep saying, “Who will put happiness before our eyes?”. Let the light of your face shine on us. 
Yahweh, 

Psa 4:7 to my heart you are a richer joy than all their corn and new wine. 

Psa 4:8 In peace I lie down and at once fall asleep, for it is you and none other, Yahweh, who make me rest 
secure. 

Psa 5:1 [For the choirmaster For flutes Psalm Of David] Give ear to my words, Yahweh, spare a thought for my 
sighing. 

Psa 5:2 Listen to my cry for help, my King and my God! To you I pray, 

Psa 5:3 Yahweh. At daybreak you hear my voice; at daybreak I lay my case before you and fix my eyes on you. 
Psa 5:4 You are not a God who takes pleasure in evil, no sinner can be your guest. 

Psa 5:5 Boasters cannot stand their ground under your gaze. You hate evil-doers, 

Psa 5:6 liars you destroy; the violent and deceitful Yahweh detests. 

Psa 5:7 But, so great is your faithful love, I may come into your house, and before your holy temple bow down in 
reverence of you. 

Psa 5:8 In your saving justice, Yahweh, lead me, because of those who lie in wait for me; make your way plain 
before me. 

Psa 5:9 Not a word from their lips can be trusted, through and through they are destruction, their throats are 
wide — open graves, their tongues seductive. 

Psa 5:10 Lay the guilt on them, God, make their intrigues their own downfall; for their countless offences, thrust 
them from you, since they have rebelled against you. 

Psa 5:1 1 But joy for all who take refuge in you, endless songs of gladness! You shelter them, they rejoice in 
you, those who love your name. 

Psa 5:12 It is you who bless the upright, Yahweh, you surround them with favour as with a shield. 

Psa 6:1 [For the choirmaster For strings For the octachord Psalm Of David] Yahweh, let your rebuke to me not 
be in anger, your punishment not in the heat of wrath. 

Psa 6:2 Have pity on me, Yahweh, for I am fading away. Heal me, Yahweh, my bones are shaken, 

Psa 6:3 my spirit is shaken to its very depths. But you, Yahweh … how long? 

Psa 6:4 Yahweh, relent and save my life rescue me because of your faithful love, 

Psa 6:5 for in death there is no remembrance of you; who could sing your praises in Sheol? 

Psa 6:6 I am worn out with groaning, every night I drench my pillow and soak my bed with tears. 

Psa 6:7 My eyes waste away with vexation. Arrogance from all my foes! 

Psa 6:8 Away from me, all evil-doers! For Yahweh has heard the sound of my weeping, 

Psa 6:9 Yahweh has heard my pleading. Yahweh will accept my prayer. 

Psa 6:10 Let all my enemies be put to confusion, shaken to their depths, let them retreat in sudden confusion. 

Psa 7:1 [Lament Of David Which he sang to Yahweh about Cush the Benjaminite] Yahweh my God, I take 

refuge in you, save me from all my pursuers and rescue me, 

Psa 7:2 or he will savage me like a lion, carry me off with no one to rescue me. 

Psa 7:3 Yahweh my God, if I have done this: if injustice has stained my hands, 

Psa 7:4 if I have repaid my ally with treachery or spared one who attacked me unprovoked, 

Psa 7:5 may an enemy hunt me down and catch me, may he trample my life into the ground and crush my vital 
parts into the dust. Pause 

Psa 7:6 Arise, Yahweh, in your anger, rise up against the arrogance of my foes. Awake, my God, you demand 
judgement. 

Psa 7:7 Let the assembly of nations gather round you; return above it on high! 

Psa 7:8 (Yahweh judges the nations.) Judge me, Yahweh, as my uprightness and my integrity deserve. 

Psa 7:9 Put an end to the malice of the wicked, make the upright stand firm, you who discern hearts and minds, 
God the upright. 

Psa 7:10 God is a shield that protects me, saving the honest of heart. 

Psa 7:1 1 God is an upright judge, slow to anger, but a God at all times threatening 

Psa 7:12 for those who will not repent. Let the enemy whet his sword, draw his bow and make ready; 

Psa 7:13 but he is making ready instruments of death for himself and tipping his arrows with fire; 

Psa 7:14 look at him: pregnant with malice, conceiving spite, he gives birth to treachery. 

Psa 7:15 He digs a trap, scoops it out, but he falls into the snare he made himself. 

Psa 7:16 His spite recoils on his own head, his brutality falls back on his own skull. 

Psa 7:17 I thank Yahweh for his saving justice. I sing to the name of the Most High. 

Psa 8:1 [For the choirmaster On the … of Gath Psalm Of David] Yahweh our Lord, how majestic is your name 
throughout the world! Whoëver keeps singing of your majesty higher than the heavens, 

Psa 8:2 even through the mouths of children, or of babes in arms, you make him a fortress, firm against your 



foes, to subdue the enemy and the rebel. 

Psa 8:3 I look up at your heavens, shaped by your fingers, at the moon and the stars you set firm- 

Psa 8:4 what are human beings that you spare a thought for them, or the child of Adam that you care for him? 

Psa 8:5 Yet you have made him little less than a god, you have crowned him with glory and beauty, 

Psa 8:6 made him lord of the works of your hands, put all things under his feet, 

Psa 8:7 sheep and cattle, all of them, and even the wild beasts, 

Psa 8:8 birds in the sky, fish in the sea, when he makes his way across the ocean. 

Psa 8:9 Yahweh our Lord, how majestic your name throughout the world! 

Psa 9:1 [For the choirmaster On oboe and harp Psalm Of David] I thank you, Yahweh, with my whole heart, I 
recount all your wonders, 

Psa 9:2 I rejoice and delight in you, I sing to your name, Most High. 

Psa 9:3 My enemies are in retreat, they stumble and perish at your presence, 

Psa 9:4 for you have given fair judgement in my favour, seated on your throne as upright judge. 

Psa 9:5 You have rebuked the nations, destroyed the wicked, blotted out their name for ever and ever; 

Psa 9:6 the enemy is wiped out — mere ruins for ever — you have annihilated their cities, their memory has 
perished. See, 

Psa 9:7 Yahweh is enthroned for ever, keeping his throne firm for judgement; 

Psa 9:8 he will himself judge the world in uprightness, will give a true verdict on the nations. 

Psa 9:9 May Yahweh be a stronghold for the oppressed, a stronghold in times of trouble! 

Psa 9:10 Those who revere your name can rely on you, you never desert those who seek you, Yahweh. 

Psa 9:1 1 Sing to Yahweh who dwells in Zion, tell the nations his mighty deeds, 

Psa 9:12 for the avenger of blood does not forget them, he does not ignore the cry of the afflicted. 

Psa 9:13 Have pity on me, Yahweh, see my affliction, pull me back from the gates of death, 

Psa 9:14 that I may recount all your praises at the gates of the daughter of Zion and rejoice in your salvation. 
Psa 9:15 The nations have fallen into the trap they made, their feet caught in the snare they laid. 

Psa 9:16 Yahweh has made himself known, given judgement, he has ensnared the wicked in the work of their 
own hands. Muted music Pause 

Psa 9:17 May the wicked turn away to Sheol, all the nations forgetful of God. 

Psa 9:18 For the needy is not forgotten for ever, not for ever does the hope of the poor come to nothing. 

Psa 9:19 Arise, Yahweh; human strength shall not prevail. The nations shall stand trial before you. 

Psa 9:20 Strike them with terror, Yahweh; the nations shall know that they are no more than human!Pause 
Psa 10:1 Why, Yahweh, do you keep so distant, stay hidden in times of trouble? 

Psa 10:2 In his pride the wicked hunts down the weak, who is caught in the schemes he devises. 

Psa 10:3 The wicked is proud of his inmost desires, by his blasphemies the grasping spurns Yahweh, 

Psa 10:4 the wicked in his arrogance does not look very far; There is no God”, is his only thought. 

Psa 10:5 In all circumstances his step is assured; your judgements are above his head. His rivals? He scoffs at 
them all. 

Psa 10:6 He says in his heart, “I shall never be shaken”, free of trouble himself, 

Psa 10:7 he wishes it on others. His speech is full of lies and browbeating, under his tongue lurk spite and 
wickedness. 

Psa 10:8 In the undergrowth he lies in ambush, in his hiding-place he murders the innocent. He watches intently 
for the downtrodden, 

Psa 10:9 lurking unseen like a lion in his lair, lurking to pounce on the poor; he pounces on him and drags him 
off in his net. 

Psa 10:10 He keeps watch, crouching down low, the poor wretch falls into his clutches; 

Psa 10:11 he says in his heart, “God forgets, he has turned away his face to avoid seeing the end”. 

Psa 10:12 Rise, Yahweh! God, raise your hand, do not forget the afflicted! 

Psa 10:13 Why should the wicked spurn God, assuring himself you will never follow it up? 

Psa 10:14 You have seen for yourself the trouble and vexation, you watch so as to take it in hand. The 
oppressed relies on you; you are the only recourse of the orphan. 

Psa 10:15 Break the arm of the wicked and evil, seek out wickedness till there is none left to be found. 

Psa 10:16 Yahweh is king for ever and ever, the heathen has vanished from his country. 

Psa 10:17 Yahweh, you listen to the laments of the poor, you give them courage, you grant them a hearing, 

Psa 10:18 to give judgement for the orphaned and exploited, so that earthborn humans may strike terror no 
more. 

Psa 1 1:1 [For the choirmaster Of David] In Yahweh I have found refuge. How can you say to me, “Bird, flee to 
your mountain? 

Psa 1 1 :2 “For look, the wicked are drawing their bows, fitting their arrows to the string to shoot honest men from 
the shadows. 



Psa 11:3 If the foundations fall to ruin, what can the upright do?”. 

Psa 1 1 :4 Yahweh in his holy temple! Yahweh, his throne is in heaven; his eyes watch over the world, his gaze 
scrutinises the children of Adam. 

Psa 1 1 :5 Yahweh examines the upright and the wicked, the lover of violence he detests. 

Psa 11:6 He will rain down red-hot coals, fire and sulphur on the wicked, a scorching wind will be their lot. 

Psa 1 1 :7 For Yahweh is upright and loves uprightness, the honest will ever see his face. 

Psa 12:1 [For the choirmaster On the octachord Psalm Of David] Help, Yahweh! No one loyal is left, the faithful 
have vanished from among the children of Adam. 

Psa 12:2 Friend tells lies to friend, and, smooth-tongued, speaks from an insincere heart. 

Psa 12:3 May Yahweh cut away every smooth lip, every boastful tongue, 

Psa 12:4 those who say, “In our tongue lies our strength, our lips are our allies; who can master us?”. 

Psa 12:5 “For the poor who are plundered, the needy who groan, now will I act”, says Yahweh, “I will grant 
salvation to those who sigh for it”. 

Psa 12:6 Yahweh’s promises are promises unalloyed, natural silver which comes from the earth seven times 
refined. 

Psa 12:7 You, Yahweh, will watch over them, you will protect them from that brood for ever. 

Psa 12:8 The wicked will scatter in every direction, as the height of depravity among the children of Adam. 

Psa 13:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] How long, Yahweh, will you forget me? For ever? How long will 
you turn away your face from me? 

Psa 13:2 How long must I nurse rebellion in my soul, sorrow in my heart day and night? How long is the enemy 
to domineer over me? 

Psa 1 3:3 Look down, answer me, Yahweh my God! Give light to my eyes or I shall fall into the sleep of death. 
Psa 1 3:4 Or my foe will boast, “I have overpowered him”, and my enemy have the joy of seeing me stumble. 

Psa 1 3:5 As for me, I trust in your faithful love, Yahweh. Let my heart delight in your saving help, let me sing to 
Yahweh for his generosity to me, let me sing to the name of Yahweh the Most High! 

Psa 14:1 [For the choirmaster Of David] The fool has said in his heart, “There is no God”. Their deeds are 
corrupt and vile, not one of them does right. 

Psa 14:2 Yahweh looks down from heaven at the children of Adam. To see if a single one is wise, a single one 
seeks God. 

Psa 14:3 All have turned away, all alike turned sour, not one of them does right, not a single one. 

Psa 14:4 Are they not aware, all these evil-doers? They are devouring my people, this is the bread they eat, and 
they never call to Yahweh. 

Psa 14:5 They will be gripped with fear, where there is no need for fear, for God takes the side of the upright; 
Psa 14:6 you may mock the plans of the poor, but Yahweh is their refuge. 

Psa 14:7 Who will bring from Zion salvation for Israel? When Yahweh brings his people home, what joy for 
Jacob, what happiness for Israel! 

Psa 15:1 [Psalm Of David] Yahweh, who can find a home in your tent, who can dwell on your holy mountain? 
Psa 15:2 Whoëver lives blamelessly, who acts uprightly, who speaks the truth from the heart, 

Psa 15:3 who keeps the tongue under control, who does not wrong a comrade, who casts no discredit on a 
neighbour, 

Psa 15:4 who looks with scorn on the vile, but honours those who fear Yahweh, who stands by an oath at any 
cost, 

Psa 15:5 who asks no interest on loans, who takes no bribe to harm the innocent. No one who so acts can ever 
be shaken. 

Psa 16:1 [In a quiet voice Of David] Protect me, O God, in you is my refuge. 

Psa 16:2 To Yahweh I say, “You are my Lord, my happiness is in none 

Psa 16:3 of the sacred spirits of the earth”. They only take advantage of all who love them. 

Psa 16:4 People flock to their teeming idols. Never shall I pour libations to them! Never take their names on my 
lips. 

Psa 16:5 My birthright, my cup is Yahweh; you, you alone, hold my lot secure. 

Psa 16:6 The measuring-line marks out for me a delightful place, my birthright is all I could wish. 

Psa 16:7 I bless Yahweh who is my counsellor, even at night my heart instructs me. 

Psa 16:8 I keep Yahweh before me always, for with him at my right hand, nothing can shake me. 

Psa 16:9 So my heart rejoices, my soul delights, my body too will rest secure, 

Psa 16:10 for you will not abandon me to Sheol, you cannot allow your faithful servant to see the abyss. 

Psa 16:1 1 You will teach me the path of life, unbounded joy in your presence, at your right hand delight for ever. 
Psa 17:1 [Prayer Of David] Listen, Yahweh, to an upright cause, pay attention to my cry, lend an ear to my 
prayer, my lips free from deceit. 

Psa 17:2 From your presence will issue my vindication, your eyes fixed on what is right. 



Psa 17:3 You probe my heart, examine me at night, you test me by fire and find no evil. I have not sinned with 
my mouth 

Psa 17:4 as most people do. I have treasured the word from your lips, 

Psa 17:5 my steps never stray from the paths you lay down, from your tracks; so my feet never stumble. 

Psa 17:6 I call upon you, God, for you answer me; turn your ear to me, hear what I say. 

Psa 17:7 Show the evidence of your faithful love, saviour of those who hope in your strength against attack. 

Psa 17:8 Guard me as the pupil of an eye, shelter me in the shadow of your wings 

Psa 17:9 from the presence of the wicked who would maltreat me; deadly enemies are closing in on me. 

Psa 17:10 Engrossed in themselves they are mouthing arrogant words. 

Psa 17:1 1 They are advancing against me, now they are closing in, watching for the chance to hurl me to the 
ground, 

Psa 17:12 like a lion preparing to pounce, like a young lion crouching in ambush. 

Psa 17:13 Arise, Yahweh, confront him and bring him down, with your sword save my life from the wicked, 

Psa 17:14 Yahweh, from mortals, by your hand, from mortals whose part in life is in this world. You fill their 
bellies from your store, their children will have all they desire, and leave their surplus to their children. 

Psa 17:15 But I in my uprightness will see your face, and when I awake I shall be filled with the vision of you. 
Psa 18:1 [For the choirmaster Of David, the servant of Yahweh, who addressed the words of this song to 
Yahweh when Yahweh had delivered him from all his enemies and from the clutches of Saul. He said:] I love 
you, Yahweh, my strength (my Saviour, you have saved me from violence). 

Psa 18:2 Yahweh is my rock and my fortress, my deliverer is my God. I take refuge in him, my rock, my shield, 
my saving strength, my stronghold, my place of refuge. 

Psa 18:3 I call to Yahweh who is worthy of praise, and I am saved from my foes. 

Psa 18:4 With Death’s breakers closing in on me, Belial’s torrents ready to swallow me, 

Psa 18:5 Sheol’s snares every side of me, Death’s traps lying ahead of me, 

Psa 18:6 I called to Yahweh in my anguish, I cried for help to my God; from his Temple he heard my voice, my 
cry came to his ears. 

Psa 18:7 Then the earth quaked and rocked, the mountains’ foundations shuddered, they quaked at his blazing 
anger. 

Psa 18:8 Smoke rose from his nostrils, from his mouth devouring fire (coals were kindled at it). 

Psa 18:9 He parted the heavens and came down, a storm-cloud underneath his feet; 

Psa 18:10 riding one of the winged creatures, he flew, soaring on the wings of the wind. 

Psa 18:1 1 His covering he made the darkness, his pavilion dark waters and dense cloud. 

Psa 18:12 A brightness lit up before him, hail and blazing fire. 

Psa 18:13 Yahweh thundered from the heavens, the Most High made his voice heard. 

Psa 18:14 He shot his arrows and scattered them, he hurled his lightning and routed them. 

Psa 18:15 The very springs of ocean were exposed, the world’s foundations were laid bare, at your roaring, 
Yahweh, at the blast of breath from your nostrils! 

Psa 18:16 He reached down from on high, snatched me up, pulled me from the watery depths, 

Psa 18:17 rescued me from my mighty foe, from my enemies who were stronger than I. 

Psa 18:18 They assailed me on my day of disaster but Yahweh was there to support me; 

Psa 18:19 he freed me, set me at large, he rescued me because he loves me. 

Psa 18:20 Yahweh rewards me for my uprightness, as my hands are pure, so he repays me, 

Psa 18:21 since I have kept the ways of Yahweh, and not fallen away from my God. 

Psa 18:22 His judgements are all before me, his statutes I have not put away from me. 

Psa 18:23 I am blameless before him, I keep myself clear of evil. 

Psa 18:24 So Yahweh repaid me for acting uprightly because he could see I was pure. 

Psa 18:25 You are faithful to the faithful, blameless with the blameless, 

Psa 18:26 sincere to the sincere, but cunning to the crafty, 

Psa 18:27 you save a people that is humble and humiliate those with haughty looks. 

Psa 18:28 Yahweh, you yourself are my lamp, my God lights up my darkness; 

Psa 18:29 with you I storm the rampart, with my God I can scale any wall. 

Psa 18:30 This God, his way is blameless; the word of Yahweh is refined in the furnace, for he alone is the 
shield of all who take refuge in him. 

Psa 1 8:31 For who is God but Yahweh, who is a rock but our God? 

Psa 18:32 This God who girds me with strength, who makes my way free from blame, 

Psa 18:33 who makes me as swift as a deer and sets me firmly on the heights, 

Psa 18:34 who trains my hands for battle, my arms to bend a bow of bronze. 

Psa 18:35 You give me your invincible shield (your right hand upholds me) you never cease to listen to me, 

Psa 1 8:36 you give me the strides of a giant, give me ankles that never weaken. 



Psa 18:37 I pursue my enemies and overtake them, not turning back till they are annihilated; 

Psa 18:38 I strike them down and they cannot rise, they fall, they are under my feet. 

Psa 18:39 You have girded me with strength for the fight, bent down my assailants beneath me, 

Psa 18:40 made my enemies retreat before me; and those who hate me I destroy. 

Psa 18:41 They cry out, there is no one to save; to Yahweh, but no answer comes. 

Psa 18:42 I crumble them like dust before the wind, trample them like the mud of the streets. 

Psa 18:43 You free me from the quarrels of my people, you place me at the head of the nations, a people I did 
not know are now my servants; 

Psa 1 8:44 foreigners come wooing my favour, no sooner do they hear than they obey me; 

Psa 1 8:45 foreigners grow faint of heart, they come trembling out of their fastnesses. 

Psa 18:46 Life to Yahweh! Blessed be my rock! Exalted be the God of my salvation, 

Psa 18:47 the God who gives me vengeance, and subjects whole peoples to me, 

Psa 18:48 who rescues me from my raging enemies. You lift me high above those who attack me, you deliver 
me from the man of violence. 

Psa 18:49 For this I will praise you, Yahweh, among the nations, and sing praise to your name. 

Psa 1 8:50 He saves his king time after time, displays his faithful love for his anointed, for David and his heirs for 
ever. 

Psa 19:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] The heavens declare the glory of God, the vault of heaven 
proclaims his handiwork, 

Psa 19:2 day discourses of it to day, night to night hands on the knowledge. 

Psa 19:3 No utterance at all, no speech, not a sound to be heard, 

Psa 19:4 but from the entire earth the design stands out, this message reaches the whole world. High above, he 
pitched a tent for the sun, 

Psa 19:5 who comes forth from his pavilion like a bridegroom, delights like a champion in the course to be run. 

Psa 1 9:6 Rising on the one horizon he runs his circuit to the other, and nothing can escape his heat. 

Psa 19:7 The Law of Yahweh is perfect, refreshment to the soul; the decree of Yahweh is trustworthy, wisdom 
for the simple. 

Psa 1 9:8 The precepts of Yahweh are honest, joy for the heart; the commandment of Yahweh is pure, light for 
the eyes. 

Psa 1 9:9 The fear of Yahweh is pure, lasting for ever; the judgements of Yahweh are true, upright, every one, 
Psa 19:10 more desirable than gold, even than the finest gold; his words are sweeter than honey, that drips 
from the comb. 

Psa 19:11 Thus your servant is formed by them; observing them brings great reward. 

Psa 19:12 But who can detect his own failings? Wash away my hidden faults. 

Psa 19:13 And from pride preserve your servant, never let it be my master. So shall I be above reproach, free 
from grave sin. 

Psa 19:14 May the words of my mouth always find favour, and the whispering of my heart, in your presence, 
Yahweh, my rock, my redeemer. 

Psa 20:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] May Yahweh answer you in time of trouble, may the name of the 
God of Jacob protect you! 

Psa 20:2 May he send you help from the sanctuary, give you support from Zion! 

Psa 20:3 May he remember all your sacrifices and delight in your burnt offerings! Pause 
Psa 20:4 May he grant you your heart’s desire and crown all your plans with success! 

Psa 20:5 So that with joy we can hail your victory and draw up our ranks in the name of our God. May Yahweh 
grant all your petitions. 

Psa 20:6 Now I know that Yahweh gives victory to his anointed. He will respond from his holy heavens with 
great deeds of victory from his right hand. 

Psa 20:7 Some call on chariots, some on horses, but we on the name of Yahweh our God. 

Psa 20:8 They will crumple and fall, while we stand upright and firm. 

Psa 20:9 Yahweh, save the king, answer us when we call. 

Psa 21:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] Yahweh, the king rejoices in your power; How your saving help 
fills him with joy! 

Psa 21 :2 You have granted him his heart’s desire, not denied him the prayer of his lips. Pause 

Psa 21 :3 For you come to meet him with blessings of prosperity, put a crown of pure gold on his head. 

Psa 21 :4 He has asked for life, you have given it him, length of days for ever and ever. 

Psa 21 :5 Great his glory through your saving help; you invest him with splendour and majesty. 

Psa 21 :6 You confer on him everlasting blessings, you gladden him with the joy of your presence. 

Psa 21 :7 For the king puts his trust in Yahweh; the faithful love of the Most High will keep him from falling. 

Psa 21 :8 Your hand will reach all your enemies, your right hand all who hate you. 



Psa 21 :9 You will hurl them into a blazing furnace on the day when you appear; Yahweh will engulf them in his 
anger, and fire will devour them. 

Psa 21:10 You will purge the earth of their descendants, the human race of their posterity. 

Psa 21:11 They have devised evil against you but, plot as they may, they will not succeed, 

Psa 21:12 since you will make them turn tail, by shooting your arrows in their faces. 

Psa 21:13 Rise, Yahweh, in your power! We will sing and make music in honour of your strength. 

Psa 22:1 [For the choirmaster To “the Doe of the Dawn” Psalm Of David] My God, my God, why have you 
forsaken me? The words of my groaning do nothing to save me. 

Psa 22:2 My God, I call by day but you do not answer, at night, but I find no respite. 

Psa 22:3 Yet you, the Holy One, who make your home in the praises of Israel, 

Psa 22:4 in you our ancestors put their trust, they trusted and you set them free. 

Psa 22:5 To you they called for help and were delivered; in you they trusted and were not put to shame. 

Psa 22:6 But I am a worm, less than human, scorn of mankind, contempt of the people; 

Psa 22:7 all who see me jeer at me, they sneer and wag their heads, 

Psa 22:8 “He trusted himself to Yahweh, let Yahweh set him free! Let him deliver him, as he took such delight in 
him”. 

Psa 22:9 It was you who drew me from the womb and soothed me on my mother’s breast. 

Psa 22:10 On you was I cast from my birth, from the womb I have belonged to you. 

Psa 22:1 1 Do not hold aloof, for trouble is upon me, and no one to help me! 

Psa 22:12 Many bulls are encircling me, wild bulls of Bashan closing in on me. 

Psa 22:13 Lions ravening and roaring open their jaws at me. 

Psa 22:14 My strength is trickling away, my bones are all disjointed, my heart has turned to wax, melting inside 
me. 

Psa 22:15 My mouth is dry as earthenware, my tongue sticks to my jaw. You lay me down in the dust of death. 
Psa 22:16 A pack of dogs surrounds me, a gang of villains closing in on me as if to hack off my hands and my 
feet. 

Psa 22:17 I can count every one of my bones, while they look on and gloat; 

Psa 22:18 they divide my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing. 

Psa 22:19 Yahweh, do not hold aloof! My strength, come quickly to my help, 

Psa 22:20 rescue my soul from the sword, the one life I have from the grasp of the dog! 

Psa 22:21 Save me from the lion’s mouth, my poor life from the wild bulls’ horns! 

Psa 22:22 I shall proclaim your name to my brothers, praise you in full assembly: 

Psa 22:23 “You who fear Yahweh, praise him! All the race of Jacob, honour him! Revere him, all the race of 
Israel!”. 

Psa 22:24 For he has not despised nor disregarded the poverty of the poor, has not turned away his face, but 
has listened to the cry for help. 

Psa 22:25 Of you is my praise in the thronged assembly, I will perform my vows before all who fear him. 

Psa 22:26 The poor will eat and be filled, those who seek Yahweh will praise him, “May your heart live for ever”. 
Psa 22:27 The whole wide world will remember and return to Yahweh, all the families of nations bow down 
before him. 

Psa 22:28 For to Yahweh, ruler of the nations, belongs kingly power! 

Psa 22:29 All who prosper on earth will bow before him, all who go down to the dust will do reverence before 
him. And those who are dead, 

Psa 22:30 their descendants will serve him, will proclaim his name to generations 

Psa 22:31 still to come; and these will tell of his saving justice to a people yet unborn: he has fulfilled it. 

Psa 23:1 [Psalm Of David] Yahweh is my shepherd, I lack nothing. 

Psa 23:2 In grassy meadows he lets me lie. By tranquil streams he leads me 

Psa 23:3 to restore my spirit. He guides me in paths of saving justice as befits his name. 

Psa 23:4 Even were I to walk in a ravine as dark as death I should fear no danger, for you are at my side. Your 
staff and your crook are there to soothe me. 

Psa 23:5 You prepare a table for me under the eyes of my enemies; you anoint my head with oil; my cup brims 
over. 

Psa 23:6 Kindness and faithful love pursue me every day of my life. I make my home in the house of Yahweh 
for all time to come. 

Psa 24:1 [Psalm Of David] To Yahweh belong the earth and all it contains, the world and all who live there; 

Psa 24:2 it is he who laid its foundations on the seas, on the flowing waters fixed it firm. 

Psa 24:3 Who shall go up to the mountain of Yahweh? Who shall take a stand in his holy place? 

Psa 24:4 The clean of hands and pure of heart, whose heart is not set on vanities, who does not swear an oath 
in order to deceive. 



Psa 24:5 Such a one will receive blessing from Yahweh, saving justice from the God of his salvation. 

Psa 24:6 Such is the people that seeks him, that seeks your presence, God of Jacob. Pause 

Psa 24:7 Gates, lift high your heads, raise high the ancient gateways, and the king of glory shall enter! 

Psa 24:8 Who is he, this king of glory? It is Yahweh, strong and valiant, Yahweh valiant in battle. 

Psa 24:9 Gates, lift high your heads, raise high the ancient gateways, and the king of glory shall enter! 

Psa 24:10 Who is he, this king of glory? Yahweh Sabaoth, he is the king of glory. Pause 
Psa 25:1 [Of David] ADORATION I offer, Yahweh, 

Psa 25:2 to you, my God. BUT in my trust in you do not put me to shame, let not my enemies gloat over me. 

Psa 25:3 CALLING to you, none shall ever be put to shame, but shame is theirs who groundlessly break faith. 
Psa 25:4 DIRECT me in your ways, Yahweh, and teach me your paths. 

Psa 25:5 ENCOURAGE me to walk in your truth and teach me since you are the God who saves me. FOR my 
hope is in you all day long — such is your generosity, Yahweh. 

Psa 25:6 GOODNESS and faithful love have been yours for ever, Yahweh, do not forget them. 

Psa 25:7 HOLD not my youthful sins against me, but remember me as your faithful love dictates. 

Psa 25:8 INTEGRITY and generosity are marks of Yahweh for he brings sinners back to the path. 

Psa 25:9 JUDICIOUSLY he guides the humble, instructing the poor in his way. 

Psa 25:10 KINDNESS unfailing and constancy mark all Yahweh’s paths, for those who keep his covenant and 
his decrees. 

Psa 25:1 1 LET my sin, great though it is, be forgiven, Yahweh, for the sake of your name. 

Psa 25:12 MEN who respect Yahweh, what of them? He teaches them the way they must choose. 

Psa 25:13 NEIGHBOURS to happiness will they live, and their children inherit the land. 

Psa 25:14 ONLY those who fear Yahweh have his secret and his covenant, for their understanding. 

Psa 25:15 PERMANENTLY my eyes are on Yahweh, for he will free my feet from the snare. 

Psa 25:16 QUICK, turn to me, pity me, alone and wretched as I am! 

Psa 25:17 RELIEVE the distress of my heart, bring me out of my constraint. 

Psa 25:18 SPARE a glance for my misery and pain, take all my sins away. 

Psa 25:19 TAKE note how countless are my enemies, how violent their hatred for me. 

Psa 25:20 UNLESS you guard me and rescue me I shall be put to shame, for you are my refuge. 

Psa 25:21 VIRTUE and integrity be my protection, for my hope, Yahweh, is in you. 

Psa 25:22 Ransom Israel, O God, from all its troubles. 

Psa 26:1 [Of David] Yahweh, be my judge! I go on my way in innocence, my trust in Yahweh never wavers. 

Psa 26:2 Probe me, Yahweh, examine me, Test my heart and my mind in the fire. 

Psa 26:3 For your faithful love is before my eyes, and I live my life by your truth. 

Psa 26:4 No sitting with wastrels for me, no travelling with hypocrites; 

Psa 26:5 I hate the company of sinners, I refuse to sit down with the wicked. 

Psa 26:6 I will wash my hands in innocence and join the procession round your altar, Yahweh, 

Psa 26:7 to make heard the sound of thanksgiving, to proclaim all your wonders. 

Psa 26:8 Yahweh, I love the beauty of your house and the place where your glory dwells. 

Psa 26:9 Do not couple me with sinners, nor my life with men of violence, 

Psa 26:10 whose hands are stained with guilt, their right hands heavy with bribes. 

Psa 26:1 1 In innocence I will go on my way; ransom me, take pity on me. 

Psa 26:12 I take my stand on the right path; I will bless you, Yahweh, in the assemblies. 

Psa 27:1 [Of David] Yahweh is my light and my salvation, whom should I fear? Yahweh is the fortress of my life, 
whom should I dread? 

Psa 27:2 When the wicked advance against me to eat me up, they, my opponents, my enemies, are the ones 
who stumble and fall. 

Psa 27:3 Though an army pitch camp against me, my heart will not fear, though war break out against me, my 
trust will never be shaken. 

Psa 27:4 One thing I ask of Yahweh, one thing I seek: to dwell in Yahweh’s house all the days of my life, to 
enjoy the sweetness of Yahweh, to seek out his temple. 

Psa 27:5 For he hides me away under his roof on the day of evil, he folds me in the recesses of his tent, sets 
me high on a rock. 

Psa 27:6 Now my head is held high above the enemies who surround me; in his tent I will offer sacrifices of 
acclaim. I will sing, I will make music for Yahweh. 

Psa 27:7 Yahweh, hear my voice as I cry, pity me, answer me! 

Psa 27:8 Of you my heart has said, “Seek his face!”. Your face, Yahweh, I seek; 

Psa 27:9 do not turn away from me. Do not thrust aside your servant in anger, without you I am helpless. Never 
leave me, never forsake me, God, my Saviour. 

Psa 27:10 Though my father and mother forsake me, Yahweh will gather me up. 



Psa 27:1 1 Yahweh, teach me your way, lead me on the path of integrity because of my enemies; 

Psa 27:12 do not abandon me to the will of my foes — false witnesses have risen against me, and are breathing 
out violence. 

Psa 27:13 This I believe: I shall see the goodness of Yahweh, in the land of the living. 

Psa 27:14 Put your hope in Yahweh, be strong, let your heart be bold, put your hope in Yahweh. 

Psa 28:1 [Of David] To you, Yahweh, I cry, my rock, do not be deaf to me! If you stay silent I shall be like those 
who sink into oblivion. 

Psa 28:2 Hear the sound of my prayer when I call upon you, when I raise my hands, Yahweh, towards your Holy 
of Holies. 

Psa 28:3 Do not drag me away with the wicked, with evil-doers, who talk to their partners of peace with 
treachery in their hearts. 

Psa 28:4 Repay them as their deeds deserve, as befits their treacherous actions; as befits their handiwork 
repay them, let their deserts fall back on themselves. 

Psa 28:5 They do not comprehend the deeds of Yahweh, the work of his hands. May he pull them down and not 
rebuild them! 

Psa 28:6 Blessed be Yahweh for he hears the sound of my prayer. 

Psa 28:7 Yahweh is my strength and my shield, in him my heart trusts. I have been helped; my body has 
recovered its vigour, with all my heart I thank him. 

Psa 28:8 Yahweh is the strength of his people, a safe refuge for his anointed. 

Psa 28:9 Save your people, bless your heritage, shepherd them and carry them for ever! 

Psa 29:1 [Psalm Of David] Give Yahweh his due, sons of God, give Yahweh his due of glory and strength, 

Psa 29:2 give Yahweh the glory due to his name, adore Yahweh in the splendour of holiness. 

Psa 29:3 Yahweh’s voice over the waters, the God of glory thunders; Yahweh over countless waters, 

Psa 29:4 Yahweh’s voice in power, Yahweh’s voice in splendour; 

Psa 29:5 Yahweh’s voice shatters cedars, Yahweh shatters cedars of Lebanon, 

Psa 29:6 he makes Lebanon skip like a calf, Sirion like a young wild ox. 

Psa 29:7 Yahweh’s voice carves out lightning-shafts, 

Psa 29:8 Yahweh’s voice convulses the desert, Yahweh convulses the desert of Kadesh, 

Psa 29:9 Yahweh’s voice convulses terebinths, strips forests bare. In his palace all cry, “Glory!”. 

Psa 29:10 Yahweh was enthroned for the flood, Yahweh is enthroned as king for ever. 

Psa 29:1 1 Yahweh will give strength to his people, Yahweh blesses his people with peace. 

Psa 30:1 [Psalm Canticle for the Dedication of the House Of David] I praise you to the heights, Yahweh, for you 
have raised me up, you have not let my foes make merry over me. 

Psa 30:2 Yahweh, my God, I cried to you for help and you healed me. 

Psa 30:3 Yahweh, you have lifted me out of Sheol, from among those who sink into oblivion you have given me 
life. 

Psa 30:4 Make music for Yahweh, all you who are faithful to him, praise his unforgettable holiness. 

Psa 30:5 His anger lasts but a moment, his favour through life; In the evening come tears, but with dawn cries of 
joy. 

Psa 30:6 Carefree, I used to think, “Nothing can ever shake me!”. 

Psa 30:7 Your favour, Yahweh, set me on impregnable heights, but you turned away your face and I was 
terrified. 

Psa 30:8 To you, Yahweh, I call, to my God I cry for mercy. 

Psa 30:9 What point is there in my death, my going down to the abyss? Can the dust praise you or proclaim 
your faithfulness? 

Psa 30:10 Listen, Yahweh, take pity on me, Yahweh, be my help! 

Psa 30:1 1 You have turned my mourning into dancing, you have stripped off my sackcloth and clothed me with 
joy. 

Psa 30:12 So my heart will sing to you unceasingly, Yahweh, my God, I shall praise you for ever. 

Psa 31:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] In you, Yahweh, I have taken refuge, let me never be put to 
shame, in your saving justice deliver me, rescue me, 

Psa 31 :2 turn your ear to me, make haste. Be for me a rock-fastness, a fortified citadel to save me. 

Psa 31:3 You are my rock, my rampart; true to your name, lead me and guide me! 

Psa 31 :4 Draw me out of the net they have spread for me, for you are my refuge; 

Psa 31 :5 to your hands I commit my spirit, by you have I been redeemed. God of truth, 

Psa 31 :6 you hate those who serve useless idols; but my trust is in Yahweh: 

Psa 31 :7 I will delight and rejoice in your faithful love! You, who have seen my misery, and witnessed the 
miseries of my soul, 

Psa 31 :8 have not handed me over to the enemy, but have given me freedom to roam at large. 



Psa 31 :9 Take pity on me, Yahweh, for I am in trouble. Vexation is gnawing away my eyes, my soul deep within 
me. 

Psa 31:10 For my life is worn out with sorrow, and my years with sighs. My strength gives way under my misery, 
and my bones are all wasted away. 

Psa 31:11 The sheer number of my enemies makes me contemptible, loathsome to my neighbours, and my 
friends shrink from me in horror. When people see me in the street they take to their heels. 

Psa 31:12 I have no more place in their hearts than a corpse, or something lost. 

Psa 31:13 All I hear is slander — terror wherever I turn — as they plot together against me, scheming to take my 

life. 

Psa 31:14 But my trust is in you, Yahweh; I say, “You are my God”, 

Psa 31:15 every moment of my life is in your hands, rescue me from the clutches of my foes who pursue me; 
Psa 31:16 let your face shine on your servant, save me in your faithful love. 

Psa 31:17 I call on you, Yahweh, so let disgrace fall not on me, but on the wicked. Let them go down to Sheol in 

silence, 

Psa 31:18 muzzles on their lying mouths, which speak arrogantly against the upright in pride and contempt. 

Psa 31:19 Yahweh, what quantities of good things you have in store for those who fear you, and bestow on 
those who make you their refuge, for all humanity to see. 

Psa 31 :20 Safe in your presence you hide them, far from human plotting, shielding them in your tent, far from 
contentious tongues. 

Psa 31 :21 Blessed be Yahweh who works for me miracles of his faithful love (in a fortified city)! 

Psa 31:22 In a state of terror I cried, “I have been cut off from your sight!”. Yet you heard my plea for help when I 
cried out to you. 

Psa 31 :23 Love Yahweh, all his faithful: Yahweh protects his loyal servants, but he repays the arrogant with 
interest. 

Psa 31 :24 Be brave, take heart, all who put your hope in Yahweh. 

Psa 32:1 [Of David Poem] How blessed are those whose offence is forgiven, whose sin blotted out. 

Psa 32:2 How blessed are those to whom Yahweh imputes no guilt, whose spirit harbours no deceit. 

Psa 32:3 I said not a word, but my bones wasted away from groaning all the day; 

Psa 32:4 day and night your hand lay heavy upon me; my heart grew parched as stubble in summer 
drought.Pause 

Psa 32:5 I made my sin known to you, did not conceal my guilt. I said, “I shall confess my offence to Yahweh”. 
And you, for your part, took away my guilt, forgave my sin. Pause 

Psa 32:6 That is why each of your faithful ones prays to you in time of distress. Even if great floods overflow, 
they will never reach your faithful. 

Psa 32:7 You are a refuge for me, you guard me in trouble, with songs of deliverance you surround me. Pause 
Psa 32:8 I shall instruct you and teach you the way to go; I shall not take my eyes off you. 

Psa 32:9 Be not like a horse or a mule; that does not understand bridle or bit; if you advance to master them, 
there is no means of bringing them near. 

Psa 32:10 Countless troubles are in store for the wicked, but one who trusts in Yahweh is enfolded in his faithful 
love. 

Psa 32:11 Rejoice in Yahweh, exult all you upright, shout for joy, you honest of heart. 

Psa 33:1 Shout for joy, you upright; praise comes well from the honest. 

Psa 33:2 Give thanks to Yahweh on the lyre, play for him on the ten-stringed lyre. 

Psa 33:3 Sing to him a new song, make sweet music for your cry of victory. 

Psa 33:4 The word of Yahweh is straightforward, all he does springs from his constancy. 

Psa 33:5 He loves uprightness and justice; the faithful love of Yahweh fills the earth. 

Psa 33:6 By the word of Yahweh the heavens were made, by the breath of his mouth all their array. 

Psa 33:7 He collects the waters of the sea like a dam, he stores away the abyss in his treasure-house. 

Psa 33:8 Let the whole earth fear Yahweh, let all who dwell in the world revere him; 

Psa 33:9 for, the moment he spoke, it was so, no sooner had he commanded, than there it stood! 

Psa 33:10 Yahweh thwarts the plans of nations, frustrates the counsels of peoples; 

Psa 33:1 1 but Yahweh’s own plan stands firm for ever, his heart’s counsel from age to age. 

Psa 33:12 How blessed the nation whose God is Yahweh, the people he has chosen as his heritage. 

Psa 33:13 From heaven Yahweh looks down, he sees all the children of Adam, 

Psa 33:14 from the place where he sits he watches all who dwell on the earth; 

Psa 33:15 he alone moulds their hearts, he understands all they do. 

Psa 33:16 A large army will not keep a king safe, nor his strength save a warrior’s life; 

Psa 33:17 it is delusion to rely on a horse for safety, for all its power it cannot save. 

Psa 33:18 But see how Yahweh watches over those who fear him, those who rely on his faithful love, 



Psa 33:19 to rescue them from death and keep them alive in famine. 

Psa 33:20 We are waiting for Yahweh; he is our help and our shield, 

Psa 33:21 for in him our heart rejoices, in his holy name we trust. 

Psa 33:22 Yahweh, let your faithful love rest on us, as our hope has rested in you. 

Psa 34:1 [Of David, when he had feigned insanity before Abimelech, and Abimelech sent him away] I will bless 
Yahweh at all times, his praise continually on my lips. 

Psa 34:2 I will praise Yahweh from my heart; let the humble hear and rejoice. 

Psa 34:3 Proclaim with me the greatness of Yahweh, let us acclaim his name together. 

Psa 34:4 I seek Yahweh and he answers me, frees me from all my fears. 

Psa 34:5 Fix your gaze on Yahweh and your face will grow bright, you will never hang your head in shame. 

Psa 34:6 A pauper calls out and Yahweh hears, saves him from all his troubles. 

Psa 34:7 The angel of Yahweh encamps around those who fear him, and rescues them. 

Psa 34:8 Taste and see that Yahweh is good. How blessed are those who take refuge in him. 

Psa 34:9 Fear Yahweh, you his holy ones; those who fear him lack for nothing. 

Psa 34:10 Young lions may go needy and hungry, but those who seek Yahweh lack nothing good. 

Psa 34:1 1 Come, my children, listen to me, I will teach you the fear of Yahweh. 

Psa 34:12 Who among you delights in life, longs for time to enjoy prosperity? 

Psa 34:13 Guard your tongue from evil, your lips from any breath of deceit. 

Psa 34:14 Turn away from evil and do good, seek peace and pursue it. 

Psa 34: 1 5 The eyes of Yahweh are on the upright, his ear turned to their cry. 

Psa 34:16 But Yahweh’s face is set against those who do evil, to cut off the memory of them from the earth. 

Psa 34:17 They cry in anguish and Yahweh hears, and rescues them from all their troubles. 

Psa 34:18 Yahweh is near to the broken-hearted, he helps those whose spirit is crushed. 

Psa 34:19 Though hardships without number beset the upright, Yahweh brings rescue from them all. 

Psa 34:20 Yahweh takes care of all their bones, not one of them will be broken. 

Psa 34:21 But to the wicked evil brings death, those who hate the upright will pay the penalty. 

Psa 34:22 Yahweh ransoms the lives of those who serve him, and there will be no penalty for those who take 
refuge in him. 

Psa 35:1 [Of David] Accuse my accusers, Yahweh, attack my attackers. 

Psa 35:2 Grasp your buckler and shield, up, and help me. 

Psa 35:3 Brandish spear and pike to confront my pursuers, give me the assurance, “I am your Saviour”. 

Psa 35:4 Shame and humiliation on those who are out to kill me! Defeat and repulse in dismay on those who 
plot my downfall. 

Psa 35:5 May they be like chaff before the wind, with the angel of Yahweh to chase them. 

Psa 35:6 May their way be dark and slippery, with the angel of Yahweh to hound them. 

Psa 35:7 Unprovoked they laid their snare for me, unprovoked dug a trap to kill me. 

Psa 35:8 Ruin comes upon them unawares; the snare they have laid will catch them, and into their own trap 
they will fall. 

Psa 35:9 Then I shall delight in Yahweh, rejoice that he has saved me. 

Psa 35:10 My very bones will all exclaim, Yahweh, who can compare with you in rescuing the poor from the 
oppressor; the needy from the exploiter? 

Psa 35:1 1 False witnesses come forward against me asking me questions I cannot answer, they cross-examine 
me, 

Psa 35:12 repay my kindness with cruelty, make my life barren. 

Psa 35:13 But I, when they were ill, had worn sackcloth, and mortified myself with fasting, praying ever anew in 
my heart, 

Psa 35:14 as if for a friend or brother; I had wandered restless, as if mourning a mother, so bowed had I been in 
sorrow. 

Psa 35:15 When I stumble they gather in glee, gather around me; strangers I never even knew tear me apart 
incessantly. 

Psa 35:16 If I fall they surround me, grinding their teeth at me. 

Psa 35:17 How much longer, Lord, will you look on? Rescue me from their onslaughts, from young lions rescue 
the one life that I have. 

Psa 35:18 I will give you thanks in the great assembly praise you where the people gather. 

Psa 35:19 Let not my lying enemies gloat over me; those who hate me unprovoked look askance at me. 

Psa 35:20 They have no greeting of peace to the peace-loving people of the land; they think up deceptive 
speeches. 

Psa 35:21 Their mouths wide open to accuse me, they say, “Come on now, we saw you”. 

Psa 35:22 You saw it, Yahweh, do not stay silent; Lord, do not stand aloof from me. 



Psa 35:23 Up, awake, to my defence, my God and my Lord, to my cause. 

Psa 35:24 In your saving justice give judgement for me, Yahweh my God, and do not let them gloat over me. 

Psa 35:25 Do not let them think, “Just as we hoped”, nor, “Now we have swallowed him up”. 

Psa 35:26 Shame and dismay on them all who gloat over my misfortunes. Let all who profit at my expense be 
covered with shame and disgrace. 

Psa 35:27 But let all who delight in my uprightness shout for joy and gladness; let them constantly say, “Great is 
Yahweh, who delights to see his servant in peace”. 

Psa 35:28 And my tongue shall recount your saving justice, all day long sing your praise. 

Psa 36:1 [For the choirmaster Of the servant of Yahweh Of David] Sin is the oracle of the wicked in the depths 
of his heart; there is no fear of God before his eyes. 

Psa 36:2 He sees himself with too flattering an eye to detect and detest his guilt; 

Psa 36:3 all he says is malicious and deceitful, he has turned his back on wisdom. To get his way 

Psa 36:4 he hatches malicious plots even in his bed; once set on his evil course no wickedness is too much for 

him. 

Psa 36:5 Yahweh, your faithful love is in the heavens, your constancy reaches to the clouds, 

Psa 36:6 your saving justice is like towering mountains, your judgements like the mighty deep. Yahweh, you 
support both man and beast; 

Psa 36:7 how precious, God, is your faithful love. So the children of Adam take refuge in the shadow of your 
wings. 

Psa 36:8 They feast on the bounty of your house, you let them drink from your delicious streams; 

Psa 36:9 in you is the source of life, by your light we see the light. 

Psa 36:10 Maintain your faithful love to those who acknowledge you, and your saving justice to the honest of 
heart. 

Psa 36:1 1 Do not let the foot of the arrogant overtake me or wicked hands drive me away. 

Psa 36:12 There they have fallen, the evil-doers, flung down, never to rise again. 

Psa 37:1 [Of David] Do not get heated about the wicked or envy those who do wrong. 

Psa 37:2 Quick as the grass they wither, fading like the green of the fields. 

Psa 37:3 Put your trust in Yahweh and do right, make your home in the land and live secure. 

Psa 37:4 Make Yahweh your joy and he will give you your heart’s desires. 

Psa 37:5 Commit your destiny to Yahweh, be confident in him, and he will act, 

Psa 37:6 making your uprightness clear as daylight, and the justice of your cause as the noon. 

Psa 37:7 Stay quiet before Yahweh, wait longingly for him, do not get heated over someöne who is making a 
fortune, succeeding by devious means. 

Psa 37:8 Refrain from anger, leave rage aside, do not get heated — it can do no good; 

Psa 37:9 for evil-doers will be annihilated, while those who hope in Yahweh shall have the land for their own. 

Psa 37:10 A little while and the wicked will be no more, however well you search for the place, the wicked will 
not be there; 

Psa 37:1 1 but the poor will have the land for their own, to enjoy untroubled peace. 

Psa 37:12 The wicked plots against the upright and gnashes his teeth at him, 

Psa 37:13 but Yahweh only laughs at his efforts, knowing that his end is in sight. 

Psa 37:14 Though the wicked draw his sword and bend his bow to slaughter the honest and bring down the 
poor and the needy, 

Psa 37:15 his sword will pierce his own heart, and his bow will be shattered. 

Psa 37:16 What little the upright possesses outweighs all the wealth of the wicked; 

Psa 37:17 for the weapons of the wicked shall be shattered, while Yahweh supports the upright. 

Psa 37:18 The lives of the just are in Yahweh’s care, their birthright will endure for ever; 

Psa 37:19 they will not be put to shame when bad times come, in time of famine they will have plenty. 

Psa 37:20 The wicked, enemies of Yahweh, will be destroyed, they will vanish like the green of the pasture, they 
will vanish in smoke. 

Psa 37:21 The wicked borrows and will not repay, but the upright is generous in giving; 

Psa 37:22 those he blesses will have the land for their own, and those he curses be annihilated. 

Psa 37:23 Yahweh guides a strong man’s steps and keeps them firm; and takes pleasure in him. 

Psa 37:24 When he trips he is not thrown sprawling, since Yahweh supports him by the hand. 

Psa 37:25 Now I am old, but ever since my youth I never saw an upright person abandoned, or the descendants 
of the upright forced to beg their bread. 

Psa 37:26 The upright is always compassionate, always lending, so his descendants reap a blessing. 

Psa 37:27 Turn your back on evil and do good, you will have a home for ever, 

Psa 37:28 for Yahweh loves justice and will not forsake his faithful. Evil-doers will perish eternally, the 
descendants of the wicked be annihilated, 



Psa 37:29 but the upright shall have the land for their own, there they shall live for ever. 

Psa 37:30 Wisdom comes from the lips of the upright, and his tongue speaks what is right; 

Psa 37:31 the law of his God is in his heart, his foot will never slip. 

Psa 37:32 The wicked keeps a close eye on the upright, looking out for a chance to kill him; 

Psa 37:33 Yahweh will never abandon him to the clutches of the wicked, nor let him be condemned if he is tried. 
Psa 37:34 Put your hope in Yahweh, keep to his path, he will raise you up to make the land your own; you will 
look on while the wicked are annihilated. 

Psa 37:35 I have seen the wicked exultant, towering like a cedar of Lebanon. 

Psa 37:36 When next I passed he was gone, I searched for him and he was nowhere to be found. 

Psa 37:37 Observe the innocent, consider the honest, for the lover of peace will not lack children. 

Psa 37:38 But the wicked will all be destroyed together, and their children annihilated. 

Psa 37:39 The upright have Yahweh for their Saviour, their refuge in times of trouble; 

Psa 37:40 Yahweh helps them and rescues them, he will rescue them from the wicked, and save them because 
they take refuge in him. 

Psa 38:1 [Psalm Of David In commemoration] Yahweh, do not correct me in anger, do not discipline me in 
wrath. 

Psa 38:2 For your arrows have pierced deep into me, your hand has pressed down upon me. 

Psa 38:3 Your indignation has left no part of me unscathed, my sin has left no health in my bones. 

Psa 38:4 My sins stand higher than my head, they weigh on me as an unbearable weight. 

Psa 38:5 I have stinking, festering wounds, thanks to my folly. 

Psa 38:6 I am twisted and bent double, I spend my days in gloom. 

Psa 38:7 My loins burn with fever, no part of me is unscathed. 

Psa 38:8 Numbed and utterly crushed I groan in distress of heart. 

Psa 38:9 Lord, all my longing is known to you, my sighing no secret from you, 

Psa 38:10 my heart is throbbing, my strength has failed, the light has gone out of my eyes. 

Psa 38:1 1 Friends and companions shun my disease, even the dearest of them keep their distance. 

Psa 38:12 Those with designs on my life lay snares, those who wish me ill speak of violence and hatch 
treachery all day long. 

Psa 38:13 But I hear nothing, as though I were deaf, as though dumb, saying not a word. 

Psa 38:14 I am like the one who, hearing nothing, has no sharp answer to make. 

Psa 38:15 For in you, Yahweh, I put my hope, you, Lord my God, will give answer. 

Psa 38:16 I said, “Never let them gloat over me, do not let them take advantage of me if my foot slips”. 

Psa 38:17 There is no escape for me from falling, no relief from my misery. 

Psa 38:18 But I make no secret of my guilt, I am anxious at the thought of my sin. 

Psa 38:19 There is no numbering those who oppose me without cause, no counting those who hate me 
unprovoked, 

Psa 38:20 repaying me evil for good, slandering me for trying to do them good. 

Psa 38:21 Yahweh, do not desert me, my God, do not stand aloof from me. 

Psa 38:22 Come quickly to my help, Lord, my Saviour! 

Psa 39:1 [For the choirmaster For Jeduthun Psalm Of David] I said, “I will watch how I behave so that I do not 

sin by my tongue. I will keep a muzzle on my mouth as long as any sinner is near”. 

Psa 39:2 I stayed dumb, silent, speechless, but the sinner’s prosperity redoubled my torment. 

Psa 39:3 My heart had been smouldering within me, but at the thought of this it flared up and the words came 
bursting out, 

Psa 39:4 “Yahweh, let me know my fate, how much longer I have to live. Show me just how frail I am. 

Psa 39:5 “Look, you have given me but a hand’s breadth or two of life, the length of my life is as nothing to you. 

Every human being that stands on earth is a mere puff of wind, 

Psa 39:6 every human being that walks only a shadow; a mere puff of wind is the wealth stored away — no 
knowing who will profit from it”. 

Psa 39:7 So now, Lord, what am I to hope for? My hope is in you. 

Psa 39:8 Save me from all my sins, do not make me the butt of fools. 

Psa 39:9 I keep silence, I speak no more since you yourself have been at work. 

Psa 39:10 Take your scourge away from me. I am worn out by the blows you deal me. 

Psa 39:1 1 You correct human beings by punishing sin, like a moth you eat away all their desires — a human 
being is a mere puff of wind. 

Psa 39:12 Yahweh, hear my prayer, listen to my cry for help, do not remain deaf to my weeping. For I am a 
stranger in your house, a nomad like all my ancestors. 

Psa 39:13 Turn away your gaze that I may breathe freely before I depart and am no more! 

Psa 40:1 [For the choirmaster Of David Psalm] I waited, I waited for Yahweh, then he stooped to me and heard 



my cry for help. 

Psa 40:2 He pulled me up from the seething chasm, from the mud of the mire. He set my feet on rock, and 
made my footsteps firm. 

Psa 40:3 He put a fresh song in my mouth, praise of our God. Many will be awestruck at the sight, and will put 
their trust in Yahweh. 

Psa 40:4 How blessed are those who put their trust in Yahweh, who have not sided with rebels and those who 
have gone astray in falsehood. 

Psa 40:5 How much you have done, Yahweh, my God — your wonders, your plans for us — you have no equal. I 
will proclaim and speak of them; they are beyond number. 

Psa 40:6 You wanted no sacrifice or cereal offering, but you gave me an open ear, you did not ask for burnt 
offering or sacrifice for sin; 

Psa 40:7 then I said, “Here I am, I am coming”. In the scroll of the book it is written of me, 

Psa 40:8 my delight is to do your will; your law, my God, is deep in my heart. 

Psa 40:9 I proclaimed the saving justice of Yahweh in the great assembly. See, I will not hold my tongue, as you 
well know. 

Psa 40:10 I have not kept your saving justice locked in the depths of my heart, but have spoken of your 
constancy and saving help. I have made no secret of your faithful and steadfast love, in the great assembly. 

Psa 40:1 1 You, Yahweh, have not withheld your tenderness from me; your faithful and steadfast love will always 
guard me. 

Psa 40:12 For troubles surround me, until they are beyond number; my sins have overtaken me; I cannot see 
my way. They outnumber the hairs of my head, and my heart fails me. 

Psa 40:13 Be pleased, Yahweh, to rescue me, Yahweh, come quickly and help me! 

Psa 40:14 Shame and dismay to all who seek to take my life. Back with them, let them be humiliated who 
delight in my misfortunes. 

Psa 40:15 Let them be aghast with shame, those who say to me, “Aha, aha!”. 

Psa 40:16 But joy and happiness in you to all who seek you! Let them ceaselessly cry, “Great is Yahweh” who 
love your saving power. 

Psa 40:17 Poor and needy as I am, the Lord has me in mind. You, my helper, my Saviour, my God, do not 
delay. 

Psa 41:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] Blessed is anyone who cares for the poor and the weak; in time 
of trouble Yahweh rescues him. 

Psa 41 :2 Yahweh protects him, gives him life and happiness on earth. Do not abandon him to his enemies’ 
pleasure! 

Psa 41 :3 Yahweh sustains him on his bed of sickness; you transform altogether the bed where he lies sick. 

Psa 41 :4 For my part I said, “Yahweh, take pity on me! Cure me for I have sinned against you”. 

Psa 41 :5 My enemies speak to me only of disaster, “When will he die and his name disappear?”. 

Psa 41 :6 When people come to see me their talk is hollow, when they get out they spread the news with spite in 
their hearts. 

Psa 41 :7 All who hate me whisper together about me and reckon I deserve the misery I suffer. 

Psa 41 :8 “A fatal sickness has a grip on him; now that he is down, he will never get up again”. 

Psa 41 :9 Even my trusted friend on whom I relied, who shared my table, takes advantage of me. 

Psa 41:10 But you, Yahweh, take pity on me! Put me on my feet and I will give them their due. 

Psa 41:11 This will convince me that you delight in me, if my enemy no longer exults over me. 

Psa 41:12 Then you will keep me unscathed, and set me in your presence for ever. 

Psa 41:13 Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Israel, from eternity to eternity. Amen, Amen. 

Psa 42:1 [For the choirmaster Poem Of the sons of Korah] As a deer yearns for running streams, so I yearn for 
you, my God. 

Psa 42:2 I thirst for God, the living God; when shall I go to see the face of God? 

Psa 42:3 I have no food but tears day and night, as all day long I am taunted, “Where is your God?”. 

Psa 42:4 This I remember as I pour out my heart, how I used to pass under the roof of the Most High used to go 
to the house of God, among cries of joy and praise, the sound of the feast. 

Psa 42:5 Why be so downcast, why all these sighs? Hope in God! I will praise him still, my Saviour, 

Psa 42:6 my God. When I am downcast I think of you: from the land of Jordan and Hermon, I think of you, 
humble mountain. 

Psa 42:7 Deep is calling to deep by the roar of your cataracts, all your waves and breakers have rolled over me. 

Psa 42:8 In the daytime God sends his faithful love, and even at night; the song it inspires in me is a prayer to 

my living God. 

Psa 42:9 I shall say to God, my rock, “Why have you forgotten me? Why must I go around in mourning, 
harrassed by the enemy?”. 



Psa 42:10 With death in my bones, my enemies taunt me, all day long they ask me, “Where is your God?”. 

Psa 42:1 1 Why so downcast, why all these sighs? Hope in God! I will praise him still, my Saviour, my God. 

Psa 43:1 Judge me, God, defend my cause against a people who have no faithful love; from those who are 
treacherous and unjust, rescue me. 

Psa 43:2 For you are the God of my strength; why abandon me? Why must I go around in mourning, harrassed 
by the enemy? 

Psa 43:3 Send out your light and your truth; they shall be my guide, to lead me to your holy mountain to the 
place where you dwell. 

Psa 43:4 Then I shall go to the altar of God, to the God of my joy. I will rejoice and praise you on the harp, O 
God, my God. 

Psa 43:5 Why so downcast, why all these sighs? Hope in God! I will praise him still, my Saviour, my God. 

Psa 44:1 [For the choirmaster Of the sons of Korah Poem] God, we have heard for ourselves, our ancestors 
have told us, of the deeds you did in their days, in days of old, 

Psa 44:2 by your hand. To establish them in the land you drove out nations, to make room for them you harried 
peoples. 

Psa 44:3 It was not their own sword that won the land, nor their own arms which made them victorious, but your 
hand it was and your arm, and the light of your presence, for you loved them. 

Psa 44:4 You are my king, my God, who decreed Jacob’s victories; 

Psa 44:5 through you we conquered our opponents, in your name we trampled down those who rose up against 
us. 

Psa 44:6 For my trust was not in my bow, my victory was not won by my sword; 

Psa 44:7 it was you who saved us from our opponents, you who put to shame those who hate us. 

Psa 44:8 Our boast was always of God, we praised your name without ceasing. Pause 

Psa 44:9 Yet now you have abandoned and humiliated us, you no longer take the field with our armies, 

Psa 44:10 you leave us to fall back before the enemy, those who hate us plunder us at will. 

Psa 44:1 1 You hand us over like sheep for slaughter, you scatter us among the nations, 

Psa 44:12 you sell your people for a trifle and make no profit on the sale. 

Psa 44:13 You make us the butt of our neighbours, the mockery and scorn of those around us, 

Psa 44:14 you make us a by-word among nations, other peoples shake their heads over us. 

Psa 44: 1 5 All day long I brood on my disgrace, the shame written clear on my face, 

Psa 44:16 from the sound of insult and abuse, from the sight of hatred and vengefulness. 

Psa 44:17 All this has befallen us though we had not forgotten you, nor been disloyal to your covenant, 

Psa 44:18 our hearts never turning away, our feet never straying from your path. 

Psa 44:19 Yet you have crushed us in the place where jackals live, and immersed us in shadow dark as death. 
Psa 44:20 Had we forgotten the name of our God and stretched out our hands to a foreign god, 

Psa 44:21 would not God have found this out, for he knows the secrets of the heart? 

Psa 44:22 For your sake we are being massacred all day long, treated as sheep to be slaughtered. 

Psa 44:23 Wake, Lord! Why are you asleep? Awake! Do not abandon us for good. 

Psa 44:24 Why do you turn your face away, forgetting that we are poor and harrassed? 

Psa 44:25 For we are bowed down to the dust, and lie prone on the ground. 

Psa 44:26 Arise! Come to our help! Ransom us, as your faithful love demands. 

Psa 45:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “Lilies . . ”. Of the sons of Korah Poem Love song] My heart is stirred by a 
noble theme, I address my poem to the king, my tongue the pen of an expert scribe. 

Psa 45:2 Of all men you are the most handsome, gracefulness is a dew upon your lips, for God has blessed you 
for ever. 

Psa 45:3 Warrior, strap your sword at your side, in your majesty and splendour advance, 

Psa 45:4 ride on in the cause of truth, gentleness and uprightness. Stretch the bowstring tight, lending terror to 
your right hand. 

Psa 45:5 Your arrows are sharp, nations lie at your mercy, the king’s enemies lose heart. 

Psa 45:6 Your throne is from God, for ever and ever, the sceptre of your kingship a sceptre of justice, 

Psa 45:7 you love uprightness and detest evil. This is why God, your God, has anointed you with oil of 
gladness, as none of your rivals, 

Psa 45:8 your robes all myrrh and aloes. From palaces of ivory, harps bring you joy, 

Psa 45:9 in your retinue are daughters of kings, the consort at your right hand in gold of Ophir. 

Psa 45:10 Listen, my daughter, attend to my words and hear; forget your own nation and your ancestral home, 
Psa 45:1 1 then the king will fall in love with your beauty; he is your lord, bow down before him. 

Psa 45:12 The daughter of Tyre will court your favour with gifts, and the richest of peoples 
Psa 45:13 with jewels set in gold. Clothed 

Psa 45:14 in brocade, the king’s daughter is led within to the king with the maidens of her retinue; her 



companions are brought to her, 

Psa 45:15 they enter the king’s palace with joy and rejoicing. 

Psa 45:16 Instead of your ancestors you will have sons; you will make them rulers over the whole world. 

Psa 45:17 I will make your name endure from generation to generation, so nations will sing your praise for ever 
and ever. 

Psa 46:1 [For the choirmaster Of the sons of Korah For oboe Song] God is both refuge and strength for us, a 
help always ready in trouble; 

Psa 46:2 so we shall not be afraid though the earth be in turmoil, though mountains tumble into the depths of 
the sea, 

Psa 46:3 and its waters roar and seethe, and the mountains totter as it heaves. (Yahweh Sabaoth is with us, our 
citadel, the God of Jacob. )Pause 

Psa 46:4 There is a river whose streams bring joy to God’s city, it sanctifies the dwelling of the Most High. 

Psa 46:5 God is in the city, it cannot fall; at break of day God comes to its rescue. 

Psa 46:6 Nations are in uproar, kingdoms are tumbling, when he raises his voice the earth crumbles away. 

Psa 46:7 Yahweh Sabaoth is with us, our citadel, the God of Jacob. Pause 

Psa 46:8 Come, consider the wonders of Yahweh, the astounding deeds he has done on the earth; 

Psa 46:9 he puts an end to wars over the whole wide world, he breaks the bow, he snaps the spear, shields he 
burns in the fire. 

Psa 46:10 “Be still and acknowledge that I am God, supreme over nations, supreme over the world”. 

Psa 46:1 1 Yahweh Sabaoth is with us, our citadel, the God of Jacob. Pause 

Psa 47:1 [For the choirmaster Of the sons of Korah Psalm] Clap your hands, all peoples, acclaim God with 
shouts of joy. 

Psa 47:2 For Yahweh, the Most High, is glorious, the great king over all the earth. 

Psa 47:3 He brings peoples under our yoke and nations under our feet. 

Psa 47:4 He chooses for us our birthright, the pride of Jacob whom he loves. Pause 
Psa 47:5 God goes up to shouts of acclaim, Yahweh to a fanfare on the ram’s horn. 

Psa 47:6 Let the music sound for our God, let it sound, let the music sound for our king, let it sound. 

Psa 47:7 For he is king of the whole world; learn the music, let it sound for God! 

Psa 47:8 God reigns over the nations, seated on his holy throne. 

Psa 47:9 The leaders of the nations rally to the people of the God of Abraham. The shields of the earth belong 
to God, who is exalted on high. 

Psa 48:1 [Song Psalm Of the sons of Korah] Great is Yahweh and most worthy of praise in the city of our God, 
the holy mountain, 

Psa 48:2 towering in beauty, the joy of the whole world: Mount Zion in the heart of the north, the settlement of 
the great king; 

Psa 48:3 God himself among its palaces has proved himself its bulwark. 

Psa 48:4 For look, kings made alliance, together they advanced; 

Psa 48:5 without a second glance, when they saw, they panicked and fled away. 

Psa 48:6 Trembling seized them on the spot, pains like those of a woman in labour; 

Psa 48:7 it was the east wind, that wrecker of ships from Tarshish. 

Psa 48:8 What we had heard we saw for ourselves in the city of our God, in the city of Yahweh Sabaoth, which 
God has established for ever.Pause 

Psa 48:9 We reflect on your faithful love, God, in your temple! 

Psa 48:10 Both your name and your praise, God, are over the whole wide world. Your right hand is full of saving 
justice, 

Psa 48:1 1 Mount Zion rejoices, the daughters of Judah delight because of your saving justice. 

Psa 48:12 Go round Zion, walk right through her, count her bastions, 

Psa 48:13 admire her walls, examine her palaces, to tell future generations 
Psa 48:14 that such is God; our God for ever and ever, he is our guide! 

Psa 49:1 [For the choirmaster Of the sons of Korah Psalm] Hear this, all nations, listen, all who dwell on earth, 
Psa 49:2 people high and low, rich and poor alike! 

Psa 49:3 My lips have wisdom to utter, my heart good sense to whisper. 

Psa 49:4 I listen carefully to a proverb, I set my riddle to the music of the harp. 

Psa 49:5 Why should I be afraid in times of trouble? Malice dogs me and hems me in. 

Psa 49:6 They trust in their wealth, and boast of the profusion of their riches. 

Psa 49:7 But no one can ever redeem himself or pay his own ransom to God, 

Psa 49:8 the price for himself is too high; it can never be 

Psa 49:9 that he will live on for ever and avoid the sight of the abyss. 

Psa 49:10 For he will see the wise also die no less than the fool and the brute, and leave their wealth behind for 



others. 

Psa 49:1 1 For ever no home but their tombs, their dwelling-place age after age, though they gave their name to 
whole territories. 

Psa 49:12 In prosperity people lose their good sense, they become no better than dumb animals. 

Psa 49:13 So they go on in their self-assurance, right up to the end they are content with their lot. Pause 
Psa 49:14 They are penned in Sheol like sheep, Death will lead them to pasture, and those who are honest will 
rule over them. In the morning all trace of them will be gone, Sheol will be their home. 

Psa 49:15 But my soul God will ransom from the clutches of Sheol, and will snatch me up. Pause 
Psa 49:16 Do not be overawed when someöne gets rich, and lives in ever greater splendour; 

Psa 49:17 when he dies he will take nothing with him, his wealth will not go down with him. 

Psa 49:18 Though he pampered himself while he lived — and people praise you for looking after yourself- 
Psa 49:19 he will go to join the ranks of his ancestors, who will never again see the light. 

Psa 49:20 In prosperity people lose their good sense, they become no better than dumb animals. 

Psa 50:1 [Psalm Of Asaph] The God of gods, Yahweh, is speaking, from east to west he summons the earth. 
Psa 50:2 From Zion, perfection of beauty, he shines forth; 

Psa 50:3 he is coming, our God, and will not be silent. Devouring fire ahead of him, raging tempest around him, 
Psa 50:4 he summons the heavens from on high, and the earth to judge his people. 

Psa 50:5 “Gather to me my faithful, who sealed my covenant by sacrifice”. 

Psa 50:6 The heavens proclaim his saving justice, “God himself is judge. “Pause 

Psa 50:7 “Listen, my people, I am speaking, Israel, I am giving evidence against you, I, God, your God. 

Psa 50:8 “It is not with your sacrifices that I find fault, those burnt offerings constantly before me; 

Psa 50:9 I will not accept any bull from your homes, nor a single goat from your folds. 

Psa 50:10 “For all forest creatures are mine already, the animals on the mountains in their thousands. 

Psa 50:1 1 I know every bird in the air, whatever moves in the fields is mine. 

Psa 50:12 “If I am hungry I shall not tell you, since the world and all it holds is mine. 

Psa 50:13 Am I to eat the flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats? 

Psa 50:14 “Let thanksgiving be your sacrifice to God, fulfil the vows you make to the Most High; 

Psa 50:15 then if you call to me in time of trouble I will rescue you and you will honour me”. 

Psa 50:16 But to the wicked, God says: “What right have you to recite my statutes, to take my covenant on your 
lips, 

Psa 50:17 when you detest my teaching, and thrust my words behind you? 

Psa 50:18 “You make friends with a thief as soon as you see one, you feel at home with adulterers, 

Psa 50:19 your conversation is devoted to wickedness, and your tongue to inventing lies. 

Psa 50:20 “You sit there, slandering your own brother, you malign your own mother’s son. 

Psa 50:21 You do this, and am I to say nothing? Do you think that I am really like you? I charge you, indict you 
to your face. 

Psa 50:22 “Think it out, you who forget God, or I will tear you apart without hope of a rescuer. 

Psa 50:23 Honour to me is a sacrifice of thanksgiving; to the upright I will show God’s salvation”. 

Psa 51:1 [For the choirmaster Of David When the prophet Nathan had come to him because he had gone to 
Bathsheba] Have mercy on me, O God, in your faithful love, in your great tenderness wipe away my offences; 
Psa 51 :2 wash me clean from my guilt, purify me from my sin. 

Psa 51 :3 For I am well aware of my offences, my sin is constantly in mind. 

Psa 51 :4 Against you, you alone, I have sinned, I have done what you see to be wrong, that you may show your 
saving justice when you pass sentence, and your victory may appear when you give judgement, 

Psa 51 :5 remember, I was born guilty, a sinner from the moment of conception. 

Psa 51 :6 But you delight in sincerity of heart, and in secret you teach me wisdom. 

Psa 51 :7 Purify me with hyssop till I am clean, wash me till I am whiter than snow. 

Psa 51 :8 Let me hear the sound of joy and gladness, and the bones you have crushed will dance. 

Psa 51 :9 Turn away your face from my sins, and wipe away all my guilt. 

Psa 51:10 God, create in me a clean heart, renew within me a resolute spirit, 

Psa 51:11 do not thrust me away from your presence, do not take away from me your spirit of holiness. 

Psa 51:12 Give me back the joy of your salvation, sustain in me a generous spirit. 

Psa 51:13 I shall teach the wicked your paths, and sinners will return to you. 

Psa 51:14 Deliver me from bloodshed, God, God of my salvation, and my tongue will acclaim your saving 
justice. 

Psa 51:15 Lord, open my lips, and my mouth will speak out your praise. 

Psa 51:16 Sacrifice gives you no pleasure, burnt offering you do not desire. 

Psa 51:17 Sacrifice to God is a broken spirit, a broken, contrite heart you never scorn. 

Psa 51:18 In your graciousness do good to Zion, rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. 



Psa 51:19 Then you will delight in upright sacrifices, -burnt offerings and whole oblations — and young bulls will 
be offered on your altar. 

Psa 52:1 [For the choirmaster Poem Of David When Doeg the Edomite went and warned Saul, “David has gone 
to Abimelech’s house'] Why take pride in being wicked, you champion in villainy, all day long 
Psa 52:2 plotting crime? Your tongue is razor-sharp, you artist in perfidy. 

Psa 52:3 You prefer evil to good, lying to uprightness. Pause 
Psa 52:4 You revel in destructive talk, treacherous tongue! 

Psa 52:5 That is why God will crush you, destroy you once and for all, snatch you from your tent, uproot you 
from the land of the living. Pause 

Psa 52:6 The upright will be awestruck as they see it, they will mock him, 

Psa 52:7 “So much for someöne who would not place his reliance in God, but relied on his own great wealth, 
and made himself strong by crime”. 

Psa 52:8 But I, like a flourishing olive tree in the house of God, put my trust in God’s faithful love, for ever and 
ever. 

Psa 52:9 I shall praise you for ever for what you have done, and shall trust in your name, so full of goodness, in 
the presence of your faithful. 

Psa 53:1 [For the choirmaster In sickness Poem Of David] The fool has said in his heart, “There is no God!”. 

They are corrupt, vile and unjust, not one of them does right. 

Psa 53:2 God looks down from heaven at the children of Adam, to see if a single one is wise, a single one 
seeks God. 

Psa 53:3 All have proved faithless, all alike turned sour, not one of them does right, not a single one. 

Psa 53:4 Are they not aware, these evil-doers? They are devouring my people; this is the bread they eat, and 
they never call upon God. 

Psa 53:5 They will be gripped with fear, just where there is no need for fear, for God scatters the bones of him 
who besieges you; they are mocked because God rejects them. 

Psa 53:6 Who will bring from Zion salvation for Israel? When God brings his people home, what joy for Jacob, 
what happiness for Israel! 

Psa 54:1 [For the choirmaster On stringed instruments Poem Of David When the Ziphites went to Saul and 
said, “Is not David hiding with us?'] God, save me by your name, in your power vindicate me. 

Psa 54:2 God, hear my prayer, listen to the words I speak. 

Psa 54:3 Arrogant men are attacking me, bullies hounding me to death, no room in their thoughts for 
God. Pause 

Psa 54:4 But now God is coming to my help, the Lord, among those who sustain me. 

Psa 54:5 May their wickedness recoil on those who lie in wait for me. Yahweh, in your constancy destroy them. 
Psa 54:6 How gladly will I offer you sacrifice, and praise your name, for it is good, 

Psa 54:7 for it has rescued me from all my troubles, and my eye has feasted on my enemies. 

Psa 55:1 [For the choirmaster For strings Poem Of David] God, hear my prayer, do not hide away from my plea, 
Psa 55:2 give me a hearing, answer me, my troubles give me no peace. I shudder 

Psa 55:3 at the enemy’s shouts, at the outcry of the wicked; they heap up charges against me, in their anger 
bring hostile accusations against me. 

Psa 55:4 My heart writhes within me, the terrors of death come upon me, 

Psa 55:5 fear and trembling overwhelm me, and shuddering grips me. 

Psa 55:6 And I say, “Who will give me wings like a dove, to fly away and find rest?”. 

Psa 55:7 How far I would escape, and make a nest in the desertIPause 
Psa 55:8 I would soon find a refuge from the storm of abuse, from the 

Psa 55:9 destructive tempest, Lord, from the flood of their tongues. For I see violence and strife in the city, 

Psa 55:10 day and night they make their rounds along the city walls, Inside live malice and mischief, 

Psa 55:1 1 inside lives destruction, tyranny and treachery never absent from its central square. 

Psa 55:12 Were it an enemy who insulted me, that I could bear; if an opponent pitted himself against me, I could 
turn away from him. 

Psa 55:13 But you, a person of my own rank, a comrade and dear friend, 

Psa 55:14 to whom I was bound by intimate friendship in the house of God! May they recoil in disorder, 

Psa 55:15 may death descend on them, may they go down alive to Sheol, since evil shares their home with 
them. 

Psa 55:16 For my part, I appeal to God, and Yahweh saves me; 

Psa 55:17 evening, morning, noon, I complain and I groan. He hears my cry, 

Psa 55:18 he ransoms me and gives me peace from the feud against me, for they are taking me to law. 

Psa 55:19 But God will listen and will humble them, he who has been enthroned from the beginning; no change 
of heart for them, for they do not fear God. 



Psa 55:20 They attack those at peace with them, going back on their oaths; 

Psa 55:21 though their mouth is smoother than butter, enmity is in their hearts; their words more soothing than 
oil, yet sharpened like swords. 

Psa 55:22 Unload your burden onto Yahweh and he will sustain you; never will he allow the upright to stumble. 
Psa 55:23 You, God, will thrust them down to the abyss of destruction, men bloodthirsty and deceptive, before 
half their days are spent. For my part, I put my trust in you. 

Psa 56:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “The oppression of distant princes’ Of David In a quiet voice When the 
Philistines seized him in Gath] Take pity on me, God, as they harry me, pressing their attacks home all day. 

Psa 56:2 Those who harry me lie in wait for me all day, countless are those who attack me from the heights. 
Psa 56:3 When I am afraid, I put my trust in you, 

Psa 56:4 in God, whose word I praise, in God I put my trust and have no fear, what power has human strength 
over me? 

Psa 56:5 All day long they carp at my words, their only thought is to harm me, 

Psa 56:6 they gather together, lie in wait and spy on my movements, as though determined to take my life. 

Psa 56:7 Because of this crime reject them, in your anger, God, strike down the nations. 

Psa 56:8 You yourself have counted up my sorrows, collect my tears in your wineskin. 

Psa 56:9 Then my enemies will turn back on the day when I call. This I know, that God is on my side. 

Psa 56:10 In God whose word I praise, in Yahweh whose word I praise, 

Psa 56:1 1 in God I put my trust and have no fear; what can mortal man do to me? 

Psa 56:12 I am bound by the vows I have made, God, I will pay you the debt of thanks, 

Psa 56:13 for you have saved my life from death to walk in the presence of God, in the light of the living. 

Psa 57:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “Do not destroy” Of David In a quiet voice When he escaped from Saul in 
the cave] Take pity on me, God, take pity on me, for in you I take refuge, in the shadow of your wings I take 
refuge, until the destruction is past. 

Psa 57:2 I call to God the Most High, to God who has done everything for me; 

Psa 57:3 may he send from heaven and save me, and check those who harry me; Pause may God send his 
faithful love and his constancy. 

Psa 57:4 I lie surrounded by lions, greedy for human prey, their teeth are spears and arrows, their tongue a 
sharp sword. 

Psa 57:5 Be exalted above the heavens, God! Your glory over all the earth! 

Psa 57:6 They laid a snare in my path — 1 was bowed with care — they dug a pit ahead of me, but fell in it 

themselves. Pause 

Psa 57:7 My heart is ready, God, my heart is ready; I will sing, and make music for you. 

Psa 57:8 Awake, my glory, awake, lyre and harp, that I may awake the Dawn. 

Psa 57:9 I will praise you among the peoples, Lord, I will make music for you among nations, 

Psa 57:10 for your faithful love towers to heaven, your constancy to the clouds. 

Psa 57:1 1 Be exalted above the heavens, God! Your glory over all the earth! 

Psa 58:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “Do not destroy” Of David In a quiet voice] Divine as you are, do you truly 
give upright verdicts? do you judge fairly the children of Adam? 

Psa 58:2 No! You devise injustice in your hearts, and with your hands you administer tyranny on the earth. 

Psa 58:3 Since the womb they have gone astray, the wicked, on the wrong path since their birth, with their 
unjust verdicts. 

Psa 58:4 They are poisonous as any snake, deaf as an adder that blocks its ears 
Psa 58:5 so as not to hear the magician’s music, however skilful his spells. 

Psa 58:6 God, break the teeth in their mouths, snap off the fangs of these young lions, Yahweh. 

Psa 58:7 May they drain away like water running to waste, may they wither like trampled grass, 

Psa 58:8 like the slug that melts as it moves or a still-born child that never sees the sun. 

Psa 58:9 Before they sprout thorns like the bramble, green or burnt up, may retribution whirl them away. 

Psa 58:10 The upright will rejoice to see vengeance done, and will bathe his feet in the blood of the wicked. 
Psa 58:1 1 “So”, people will say, “the upright does have a reward; there is a God to dispense justice on earth”. 
Psa 59:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “Do not destroy” Of David In a quiet voice When Saul sent men to watch 
David’s house in order to have him killed] Rescue me from my enemies, my God, be my stronghold from my 
assailants, 

Psa 59:2 rescue me from evil-doers, from men of violence save me. 

Psa 59:3 Look at them, lurking to ambush me, violent men are attacking me, for no fault, no sin of mine, 
Yahweh, 

Psa 59:4 for no guilt, they come running to take up position. Wake up, stand by me and keep watch, 

Psa 59:5 Yahweh, God of Sabaoth, God of Israel, rise up, to punish all the nations, show no mercy to all these 
malicious traitors. Pause 



Psa 59:6 Back they come at nightfall, snarling like curs, prowling through the town. 

Psa 59:7 Look how they rant in speech with swords on their lips, “Who is there to hear us?”. 

Psa 59:8 For your part, Yahweh, you laugh at them, you make mockery of all nations. 

Psa 59:9 My strength, I keep my eyes fixed on you. For my stronghold is God, 

Psa 59:10 the God who loves me faithfully is coming to meet me, God will let me feast my eyes on those who lie 
in wait for me. 

Psa 59:1 1 Do not annihilate them, or my people may forget; shake them in your power, bring them low, Lord, 
our shield. 

Psa 59:12 Sin is in their mouths, sin on their lips, so let them be trapped in their pride for the curses and lies that 
they utter. 

Psa 59:13 Destroy them in your anger, destroy them till they are no more, and let it be known that God is Master 
in Jacob and the whole wide world. Pause 

Psa 59:14 Back they come at nightfall, snarling like curs, prowling through the town, 

Psa 59:15 scavenging for something to eat, growling unless they have their fill. 

Psa 59:16 And so I will sing of your strength, in the morning acclaim your faithful love; you have been a 
stronghold for me, a refuge when I was in trouble. 

Psa 59:17 My strength, I will make music for you, for my stronghold is God, the God who loves me faithfully. 

Psa 60:1 [For the choirmaster To the tune “The decree is a lily” In a quiet voice Of David To be learnt When he 
was at war with Aram-Naharaim and Aram-Zobah, and Joab marched back to destroy twelve thousand Edomites 
in the Valley of Salt] God, you have rejected us, broken us, you were angry, come back to us! 

Psa 60:2 You made the earth tremble, split it open; now mend the rifts, it is tottering still. 

Psa 60:3 You have forced your people to drink a bitter draught, forced us to drink a wine that made us reel. 

Psa 60:4 You gave a signal to those who fear you to let them escape out of range of the bow. Pause 
Psa 60:5 To rescue those you love, save with your right hand and answer us. 

Psa 60:6 God has spoken from his sanctuary, “In triumph I will divide up Shechem, and share out the Valley of 
Succoth. 

Psa 60:7 “Mine is Gilead, mine Manasseh, Ephraim the helmet on my head, Judah my commander’s baton, 

Psa 60:8 “Moab a bowl for me to wash in, on Edom I plant my sandal. Now try shouting ‘Victory!’. over me, 
Philistia!”. 

Psa 60:9 Who will lead me against a fortified city, who will guide me into Edom, 

Psa 60:10 if not you, the God who has rejected us? God, you no longer march with our armies. 

Psa 60:1 1 Bring us help in our time of crisis, any human help is worthless. 

Psa 60:12 With God we shall do deeds of valour, he will trample down our enemies. 

Psa 61:1 [For the choirmaster For strings Of David] God, hear my cry, listen to my prayer. 

Psa 61 :2 From the end of the earth I call to you with fainting heart. Lead me to the high rock that stands far out 
of my reach. 

Psa 61 :3 For you are my refuge, a strong tower against the enemy. 

Psa 61 :4 Let me stay in your tent for ever, taking refuge in the shelter of your wings! 

Psa 61 :5 For you, God, accept my vows, you grant me the heritage of those who fear your name. 

Psa 61 :6 Let the king live on and on, let his years continue age after age. 

Psa 61 :7 May his throne be always in God’s presence, your faithful love and constancy watch over him. 

Psa 61 :8 Then I shall always sing to your name, day after day fulfilling my vows. 

Psa 62:1 [For the choirmaster … Jeduthun Psalm Of David] In God alone there is rest for my soul, from him 
comes my safety; 

Psa 62:2 he alone is my rock, my safety, my stronghold so that I stand unshaken. 

Psa 62:3 How much longer will you set on a victim, all together, intent on murder, like a rampart already leaning 
over, a wall already damaged? 

Psa 62:4 Trickery is their only plan, deception their only pleasure, with lies on their lips they pronounce a 
blessing, with a curse in their hearts. Pause 

Psa 62:5 Rest in God alone, my soul! He is the source of my hope. 

Psa 62:6 He alone is my rock, my safety, my stronghold, so that I stand unwavering. 

Psa 62:7 In God is my safety and my glory, the rock of my strength. In God is my refuge; 

Psa 62:8 trust in him, you people, at all times. Pour out your hearts to him, God is a refuge for us. Pause 
Psa 62:9 Ordinary people are a mere puff of wind, important people a delusion; set both on the scales together, 
and they are lighter than a puff of wind. 

Psa 62:10 Put no trust in extortion, no empty hopes in robbery; however much wealth may multiply, do not set 
your heart on it. 

Psa 62:1 1 Once God has spoken, twice have I heard this: Strength belongs to God, 

Psa 62:12 to you, Lord, faithful love; and you repay everyone as their deeds deserve. 



Psa 63:1 [Psalm Of David When he was in the desert of Judah] God, you are my God, I pine for you; my heart 
thirsts for you, my body longs for you, as a land parched, dreary and waterless. 

Psa 63:2 Thus I have gazed on you in the sanctuary, seeing your power and your glory. 

Psa 63:3 Better your faithful love than life itself; my lips will praise you. 

Psa 63:4 Thus I will bless you all my life, in your name lift up my hands. 

Psa 63:5 All my longings fulfilled as with fat and rich foods, a song of joy on my lips and praise in my mouth. 

Psa 63:6 On my bed when I think of you, I muse on you in the watches of the night, 

Psa 63:7 for you have always been my help; in the shadow of your wings I rejoice; 

Psa 63:8 my heart clings to you, your right hand supports me. 

Psa 63:9 May those who are hounding me to death go down to the depths of the earth, 

Psa 63:10 given over to the blade of the sword, and left as food for jackals. 

Psa 63:1 1 Then the king shall rejoice in God, all who swear by him shall gain recognition, for the mouths of liars 
shall be silenced. 

Psa 64:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] Listen, God, to my voice as I plead, protect my life from fear of 
the enemy; 

Psa 64:2 hide me from the league of the wicked, from the gang of evil-doers. 

Psa 64:3 They sharpen their tongues like a sword, aim their arrows of poisonous abuse, 

Psa 64:4 shoot at the innocent from cover, shoot suddenly, with nothing to fear. 

Psa 64:5 They support each other in their evil designs, they discuss how to lay their snares. “Who will see us?”. 
they say, 

Psa 64:6 “or will penetrate our secrets?”. He will do that, he who penetrates human nature to its depths, the 
depths of the heart. 

Psa 64:7 God has shot them with his arrow, sudden were their wounds. 

Psa 64:8 He brings them down because of their tongue, and all who see them shake their heads. 

Psa 64:9 Everyone will be awestruck, proclaim what God has done, and understand why he has done it. 

Psa 64:10 The upright will rejoice in Yahweh, will take refuge in him, and all the honest will praise him. 

Psa 65:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David Song] Praise is rightfully yours, God, in Zion. Vows to you shall 
be fulfilled, 

Psa 65:2 for you answer prayer. All humanity must come to you 

Psa 65:3 with its sinful deeds. Our faults overwhelm us, but you blot them out. 

Psa 65:4 How blessed those whom you choose and invite to dwell in your courts. We shall be filled with the 
good things of your house, of your holy temple. 

Psa 65:5 You respond to us with the marvels of your saving justice, God our Saviour, hope of the whole wide 
world, even the distant islands. 

Psa 65:6 By your strength you hold the mountains steady, being clothed in power, 

Psa 65:7 you calm the turmoil of the seas, the turmoil of their waves. The nations are in uproar, in panic those 
who live at the ends of the earth; 

Psa 65:8 your miracles bring shouts of joy to the gateways of morning and evening. 

Psa 65:9 You visit the earth and make it fruitful, you fill it with riches; the river of God brims over with water, you 
provide the grain. To that end 

Psa 65:10 you water its furrows abundantly, level its ridges, soften it with showers and bless its shoots. 

Psa 65:1 1 You crown the year with your generosity, richness seeps from your tracks, 

Psa 65:12 the pastures of the desert grow moist, the hillsides are wrapped in joy, 

Psa 65:13 the meadows are covered with flocks, the valleys clothed with wheat; they shout and sing for joy. 

Psa 66:1 [For the choirmaster Song Psalm] Acclaim God, all the earth, 

Psa 66:2 sing psalms to the glory of his name, glorify him with your praises, 

Psa 66:3 say to God, “How awesome you are! “Your achievements are the measure of your power, your 
enemies woo your favour, 

Psa 66:4 all the earth bows down before you, sings psalms to you, sings psalms to your name. “Pause 
Psa 66:5 Come and see the marvels of God, his awesome deeds for the children of Adam: 

Psa 66:6 he changed the sea into dry land, they crossed the river on foot. So let us rejoice in him, 

Psa 66:7 who rules for ever by his power; his eyes keep watch on the nations to forestall rebellion against 
him. Pause 

Psa 66:8 Nations, bless our God, let the sound of his praise be heard; 

Psa 66:9 he brings us to life and keeps our feet from stumbling. 

Psa 66:10 God, you have put us to the test, refined us like silver, 

Psa 66:1 1 let us fall into the net; you have put a heavy strain on our backs, 

Psa 66:12 let men ride over our heads; but now the ordeal by fire and water is over, you have led us out to 
breathe again. 



Psa 66:13 I bring burnt offerings to your house, I fulfil to you my vows, 

Psa 66:14 the vows that rose to my lips, that I pronounced when I was in trouble. 

Psa 66:15 I will offer you rich burnt offerings, with the smoke of burning rams. I will sacrifice to you bullocks and 
goats. Pause 

Psa 66:16 Come and listen, all who fear God, while I tell what he has done for me. 

Psa 66:17 To him I cried aloud, high praise was on my tongue. 

Psa 66:18 Had I been aware of guilt in my heart, the Lord would not have listened, 

Psa 66:19 but in fact God did listen, attentive to the sound of my prayer. 

Psa 66:20 Blessed be God who has not turned away my prayer, nor his own faithful love from me. 

Psa 67:1 [For the choirmaster For strings Psalm Song] May God show kindness and bless us, and make his 
face shine on us. Pause 

Psa 67:2 Then the earth will acknowledge your ways, and all nations your power to save. 

Psa 67:3 Let the nations praise you, God, let all the nations praise you. 

Psa 67:4 Let the nations rejoice and sing for joy, for you judge the world with justice, you judge the peoples with 
fairness, you guide the nations on earth. Pause 

Psa 67:5 Let the nations praise you, God, let all the nations praise you. 

Psa 67:6 The earth has yielded its produce; God, our God has blessed us. 

Psa 67:7 May God continue to bless us, and be revered by the whole wide world. 

Psa 68:1 [For the choirmaster Of David Psalm Song] Let God arise, let his enemies scatter, let his opponents 
flee before him. 

Psa 68:2 You disperse them like smoke; as wax melts in the presence of a fire, so the wicked melt at the 
presence of God. 

Psa 68:3 The upright rejoice in the presence of God, delighted and crying out for joy. 

Psa 68:4 Sing to God, play music to his name, build a road for the Rider of the Clouds, rejoice in Yahweh, 
dance before him. 

Psa 68:5 Father of orphans, defender of widows, such is God in his holy dwelling. 

Psa 68:6 God gives the lonely a home to live in, leads prisoners out into prosperity, but rebels must live in the 
bare wastelands. 

Psa 68:7 God, when you set out at the head of your people, when you strode over the desert, 

Psa 68:8 the earth rocked, Pause the heavens pelted down rain at the presence of God, at the presence of God, 
the God of Israel. 

Psa 68:9 God, you rained down a shower of blessings, when your heritage was weary you gave it strength. 

Psa 68:10 Your family found a home, which you in your generosity provided for the humble. 

Psa 68:1 1 The Lord gave a command, the good news of a countless army. 

Psa 68:12 The chieftains of the army are in flight, in flight, and the fair one at home is sharing out the spoils. 

Psa 68:13 While you are at ease in the sheepfolds, the wings of the Dove are being covered with silver, and her 
feathers with a sheen of green gold; 

Psa 68:14 when Shaddai scatters the chieftains, through her it snows on the Dark Mountain. 

Psa 68:15 A mountain of God, the mountain of Bashan! a haughty mountain, the mountain of Bashan! 

Psa 68:16 Why be envious, haughty mountains, of the mountain God has chosen for his dwelling? There God 
will dwell for ever. 

Psa 68:17 The chariots of God are thousand upon thousand; God has come from Sinai to the sanctuary. 

Psa 68:18 You have climbed the heights, taken captives, you have taken men as tribute, even rebels that 
Yahweh God might have a dwelling-place. 

Psa 68:19 Blessed be the Lord day after day, he carries us along, God our Saviour.Pause 
Psa 68:20 This God of ours is a God who saves; from Lord Yahweh comes escape from death; 

Psa 68:21 but God smashes the head of his enemies, the long-haired skull of the prowling criminal. 

Psa 68:22 The Lord has said, “I will bring them back from Bashan, I will bring them back from the depths of the 
sea, 

Psa 68:23 so that you may bathe your feet in blood, and the tongues of your dogs feast on your enemies”. 

Psa 68:24 Your processions, God, are for all to see, the processions of my God, of my king, to the sanctuary; 
Psa 68:25 singers ahead, musicians behind, in the middle come girls, beating their drums. 

Psa 68:26 In choirs they bless God, Yahweh, since the foundation of Israel. 

Psa 68:27 Benjamin was there, the youngest in front, the princes of Judah in bright-coloured robes, the princes 
of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali. 

Psa 68:28 Take command, my God, as befits your power, the power, God, which you have wielded for us, 

Psa 68:29 from your temple high above Jerusalem. Kings will come to you bearing tribute. 

Psa 68:30 Rebuke the Beast of the Reeds, that herd of bulls, that people of calves, who bow down with ingots 
of silver. Scatter the people who delight in war. 



Psa 68:31 From Egypt nobles will come, Ethiopia will stretch out its hands to God. 

Psa 68:32 Kingdoms of the earth, sing to God, play for 

Psa 68:33 the Rider of the Heavens, the primeval heavens. Pause There he speaks, with a voice of power! 

Psa 68:34 Acknowledge the power of God. Over Israel his splendour, in the clouds his power. 

Psa 68:35 Awesome is God in his sanctuary. He, the God of Israel, gives strength and power to his people. 
Blessed be God. 

Psa 69:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “Lilies . . ”. Of David] Save me, God, for the waters have closed in on my 
very being. 

Psa 69:2 I am sinking in the deepest swamp and there is no firm ground. I have stepped into deep water and 
the waves are washing over me. 

Psa 69:3 I am exhausted with calling out, my throat is hoarse, my eyes are worn out with searching for my God. 
Psa 69:4 More numerous than the hairs of my head are those who hate me without reason. Those who seek to 
get rid of me are powerful, my treacherous enemies. (Must I give back what I have never stolen?) 

Psa 69:5 God, you know how foolish I am, my offences are not hidden from you. 

Psa 69:6 Those who hope in you must not be made fools of, Yahweh Sabaoth, because of me! Those who seek 
you must not be disgraced, God of Israel, because of me! 

Psa 69:7 It is for you I bear insults, my face is covered with shame, 

Psa 69:8 I am estranged from my brothers, alienated from my own mother’s sons; 

Psa 69:9 for I am eaten up with zeal for your house, and insults directed against you fall on me. 

Psa 69:10 I mortify myself with fasting, and find myself insulted for it, 

Psa 69:1 1 I dress myself in sackcloth and become their laughing-stock, 

Psa 69:12 the gossip of people sitting at the gate, and the theme of drunkards’ songs. 

Psa 69:13 And so, I pray to you, Yahweh, at the time of your favour; in your faithful love answer me, in the 
constancy of your saving power. 

Psa 69:14 Rescue me from the mire before I sink in; so I shall be saved from those who hate me, from the 
watery depths. 

Psa 69:15 Let not the waves wash over me, nor the deep swallow me up, nor the pit close its mouth on me. 

Psa 69:16 Answer me, Yahweh, for your faithful love is generous; in your tenderness turn towards me; 

Psa 69:17 do not turn away from your servant, be quick to answer me, for I am in trouble. 

Psa 69:18 Come to my side, redeem me, ransom me because of my enemies. 

Psa 69:19 You know well the insults, the shame and disgrace I endure. Every one of my oppressors is known to 
you. 

Psa 69:20 Insult has broken my heart past cure. I hoped for sympathy, but in vain, for consolers — not one to be 
found. 

Psa 69:21 To eat they gave me poison, to drink, vinegar when I was thirsty. 

Psa 69:22 May their own table prove a trap for them, and their abundance a snare; 

Psa 69:23 may their eyes grow so dim that they cannot see, all their muscles lose their strength. 

Psa 69:24 Vent your fury on them, let your burning anger overtake them. 

Psa 69:25 Reduce their encampment to ruin, and leave their tents untenanted, 

Psa 69:26 for hounding someöne you had already stricken, for redoubling the pain of one you had wounded. 

Psa 69:27 Charge them with crime after crime, exclude them from your saving justice, 

Psa 69:28 erase them from the book of life, do not enrol them among the upright. 

Psa 69:29 For myself, wounded wretch that I am, by your saving power raise me up! 

Psa 69:30 I will praise God’s name in song, I will extol him by thanksgiving, 

Psa 69:31 for this will please Yahweh more than an ox, than a bullock horned and hoofed. 

Psa 69:32 The humble have seen and are glad. Let your courage revive, you who seek God. 

Psa 69:33 For God listens to the poor, he has never scorned his captive people. 

Psa 69:34 Let heaven and earth and seas, and all that stirs in them, acclaim him! 

Psa 69:35 For God will save Zion, and rebuild the cities of Judah, and people will live there on their own land; 
Psa 69:36 the descendants of his servants will inherit it, and those who love his name will dwell there. 

Psa 70:1 [For the choirmaster Of David In commemoration] Be pleased, God, to rescue me, Yahweh, come 
quickly and help me! 

Psa 70:2 Shame and dismay to those who seek my life! Back with them! Let them be humiliated who delight in 
my misfortunes. 

Psa 70:3 Let them shrink away covered with shame, those who say to me, “Aha, aha!”. 

Psa 70:4 But joy and happiness in you to all who seek you. Let them ceaselessly cry, “God is great”, who love 
your saving power. 

Psa 70:5 Poor and needy as I am, God, come quickly to me! Yahweh, my helper, my Saviour, do not delay! 

Psa 71:1 In you, Yahweh, I take refuge, I shall never be put to shame. 



Psa 71:2 In your saving justice rescue me, deliver me, listen to me and save me. 

Psa 71:3 Be a sheltering rock for me, always accessible; you have determined to save me, for you are my rock, 
my fortress. 

Psa 71 :4 My God, rescue me from the clutches of the wicked, from the grasp of the rogue and the ruthless. 

Psa 71:5 For you are my hope, Lord, my trust, Yahweh, since boyhood. 

Psa 71:6 On you I have relied since my birth, since my mother’s womb you have been my portion, the constant 
theme of my praise. 

Psa 71:7 Many were bewildered at me, but you are my sure refuge. 

Psa 71:8 My mouth is full of your praises, filled with your splendour all day long. 

Psa 71:9 Do not reject me in my old age, nor desert me when my strength is failing, 

Psa 71:10 for my enemies are discussing me, those with designs on my life are plotting together. 

Psa 71:11 “Hound him down, for God has deserted him! Seize him, there is no one to rescue him”. 

Psa 71:12 God, do not stand aloof, my God, come quickly to help me. 

Psa 71:13 Shame and ruin on those who slander me, may those intent on harming me be covered with insult 
and infamy. 

Psa 71:14 As for me, my hope will never fade, I will praise you more and more. 

Psa 71:15 My lips shall proclaim your saving justice, your saving power all day long. 

Psa 71:16 I will come in the power of Yahweh to tell of your justice, yours alone. 

Psa 71:17 God, you have taught me from boyhood, and I am still proclaiming your marvels. 

Psa 71:18 Now that I am old and grey-haired, God, do not desert me, till I have proclaimed your strength to 
generations still to come, your power 

Psa 71:19 and justice to the skies. You have done great things, God, who is like you? 

Psa 71 :20 You have shown me much misery and hardship, but you will give me life again, You will raise me up 
again from the depths of the earth, 

Psa 71 :21 prolong my old age, and comfort me again. 

Psa 71 :22 For my part, I will thank you on the lyre for your constancy, my God. I will play the harp in your 
honour, Holy One of Israel. 

Psa 71:23 My lips sing for joy as I play to you, because you have redeemed me, 

Psa 71 :24 and all day long my tongue muses on your saving justice. Shame and disgrace on those intent to 
harm me! 

Psa 72:1 [Of Solomon] God, endow the king with your own fair judgement, the son of the king with your own 
saving justice, 

Psa 72:2 that he may rule your people with justice, and your poor with fair judgement. 

Psa 72:3 Mountains and hills, bring peace to the people! With justice 

Psa 72:4 he will judge the poor of the people, he will save the children of the needy and crush their oppressors. 
Psa 72:5 In the sight of the sun and the moon he will endure, age after age. 

Psa 72:6 He will come down like rain on mown grass, like showers moistening the land. 

Psa 72:7 In his days uprightness shall flourish, and peace in plenty till the moon is no more. 

Psa 72:8 His empire shall stretch from sea to sea, from the river to the limits of the earth. 

Psa 72:9 The Beast will cower before him, his enemies lick the dust; 

Psa 72:10 the kings of Tarshish and the islands will pay him tribute. The kings of Sheba and Saba will offer gifts; 
Psa 72:1 1 all kings will do him homage, all nations become his servants. 

Psa 72:12 For he rescues the needy who calls to him, and the poor who has no one to help. 

Psa 72:13 He has pity on the weak and the needy, and saves the needy from death. 

Psa 72:14 From oppression and violence he redeems their lives, their blood is precious in his sight. 

Psa 72:15 (Long may he live; may the gold of Sheba be given him!) Prayer will be offered for him constantly, 
and blessings invoked on him all day. 

Psa 72:16 May wheat abound in the land, waving on the heights of the hills, like Lebanon with its fruits and 
flowers at their best, like the grasses of the earth. 

Psa 72:17 May his name be blessed for ever, and endure in the sight of the sun. In him shall be blessed every 
race in the world, and all nations call him blessed. 

Psa 72:18 Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Israel, who alone works wonders; 

Psa 72:19 blessed for ever his glorious name. May the whole world be filled with his glory! Amen! Amen! 

Psa 72:20 End of the prayers of David, son of Jesse. 

Psa 73:1 [Psalm Of Asaph] Indeed God is good to Israel, the Lord to those who are pure of heart. 

Psa 73:2 My feet were on the point of stumbling, a little more and I had slipped, 

Psa 73:3 envying the arrogant as I did, and seeing the prosperity of the wicked. 

Psa 73:4 For them no such thing as pain, untroubled, their comfortable portliness; 

Psa 73:5 exempt from the cares which are the human lot, they have no part in Adam’s afflictions. 



Psa 73:6 So pride is a necklace to them, violence the garment they wear. 

Psa 73:7 From their fat oozes out malice, their hearts drip with cunning. 

Psa 73:8 Cynically they advocate evil, loftily they advocate force. 

Psa 73:9 Their mouth claims heaven for themselves, and their tongue is never still on earth. 

Psa 73:10 That is why my people turn to them, and enjoy the waters of plenty, 

Psa 73:1 1 saying, “How can God know? What knowledge can the Most High have?”. 

Psa 73:12 That is what the wicked are like, piling up wealth without any worries. 

Psa 73:13 Was it useless, then, to have kept my own heart clean, to have washed my hands in innocence? 

Psa 73:14 When I was under a hail of blows all day long, and punished every morning, 

Psa 73:15 had I said, “I shall talk like them, 1 1 should have betrayed your children’s race. 

Psa 73:16 So I set myself to understand this: how difficult I found it! 

Psa 73:17 Until I went into the sanctuaries of the gods and understood what was destined to become of them. 
Psa 73:18 You place them on a slippery slope and drive them down into chaos. 

Psa 73:19 How sudden their hideous destruction! They are swept away, annihilated by terror! 

Psa 73:20 Like a dream upon waking, Lord, when you awake, you dismiss their image. 

Psa 73:21 My heart grew embittered, my affections dried up, 

Psa 73:22 I was stupid and uncomprehending, a clumsy animal in your presence. 

Psa 73:23 Even so, I stayed in your presence, you grasped me by the right hand; 

Psa 73:24 you will guide me with advice, and will draw me in the wake of your glory. 

Psa 73:25 Who else is there for me in heaven? And, with you, I lack nothing on earth. 

Psa 73:26 My heart and my flesh are pining away: my heart’s rock, my portion, God for ever! 

Psa 73:27 Truly, those who abandon you will perish; you destroy those who adulterously desert you, 

Psa 73:28 whereäs my happiness is to be near God. I have made the Lord Yahweh my refuge, to tell of all your 
works. 

Psa 74:1 [Poem Of Asaph] God, why have you finally rejected us, your anger blazing against the flock you used 
to pasture? 

Psa 74:2 Remember the people you took to yourself long ago, your own tribe which you redeemed, and this 
Mount Zion where you came to live. 

Psa 74:3 Come up to these endless ruins! The enemy have sacked everything in the sanctuary; 

Psa 74:4 your opponents made uproar in the place of assemblies, they fixed their emblems over the entrance, 
emblems 

Psa 74:5 never known before. Their axes deep in the wood, 

Psa 74:6 hacking at the panels, they battered them down with axe and pick; 

Psa 74:7 they set fire to your sanctuary, profanely rased to the ground the dwelling-place of your name. 

Psa 74:8 They said to themselves, “Let us crush them at one stroke!”. They burned down every sacred shrine in 
the land. 

Psa 74:9 We see no signs, no prophet any more, and none of us knows how long it will last. 

Psa 74:10 How much longer, God, will the enemy blaspheme? Is the enemy to insult your name for ever? 

Psa 74:1 1 Why hold back your hand, keep your right hand hidden in the folds of your robe? 

Psa 74:12 Yet, God, my king from the first, author of saving acts throughout the earth, 

Psa 74: 1 3 by your power you split the sea in two, and smashed the heads of the monsters on the waters. 

Psa 74:14 You crushed Leviathan’s heads, gave him as food to the wild animals. 

Psa 74:15 You released the springs and brooks, and turned primordial rivers into dry land. 

Psa 74:16 Yours is the day and yours the night, you caused sun and light to exist, 

Psa 74:17 you fixed all the boundaries of the earth, you created summer and winter. 

Psa 74:18 Remember, Yahweh, the enemy’s blasphemy, a foolish people insults your name. 

Psa 74:19 Do not surrender your turtledove to the beast; do not forget for ever the life of your oppressed people. 
Psa 74:20 Look to the covenant! All the hiding-places of the land are full, haunts of violence. 

Psa 74:21 Do not let the downtrodden retreat in confusion, give the poor and needy cause to praise your name. 
Psa 74:22 Arise, God, champion your own cause, remember how fools blaspheme you all day long! 

Psa 74:23 Do not forget the shouting of your enemies, the ever-mounting uproar of your adversaries. 

Psa 75:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “Do not destroy” Psalm Of Asaph Song] We give thanks to you, God, we 
give thanks to you, as we call upon your name, as we recount your wonders. 

Psa 75:2 “At the appointed time I myself shall dispense justice. 

Psa 75:3 The earth quakes and all its inhabitants; it is I who hold its pillars firm. Pause 
Psa 75:4 “I said to the boastful, ‘Do not boast!’. to the wicked, ‘Do not flaunt your strength! 

Psa 75:5 Do not flaunt your strength so proudly, do not talk with that arrogant stance’”. 

Psa 75:6 No longer from east to west, no longer in the mountainous desert, 

Psa 75:7 is God judging in uprightness, bringing some down, raising others. 



Psa 75:8 Yahweh is holding a cup filled with a heady blend of wine; he will pour it, they will drink it to the dregs, 
all the wicked on earth will drink it. 

Psa 75:9 But I shall speak out for ever, shall make music for the God of Jacob. 

Psa 75:10 I shall break down all the strength of the wicked, and the strength of the upright will rise high. 

Psa 76:1 [For the choirmaster For strings Psalm Of Asaph Song] God is acknowledged in Judah, his name is 
great in Israel, 

Psa 76:2 his tent is pitched in Salem, his dwelling is in Zion; 

Psa 76:3 there he has broken the lightning-flashes of the bow, shield and sword and war.Pause 
Psa 76:4 Radiant you are, and renowned for the mountains of booty 

Psa 76:5 taken from them. Heroes are now sleeping their last sleep, the warriors’ arms have failed them; 

Psa 76:6 at your reproof, God of Jacob, chariot and horse stand stunned. 

Psa 76:7 You, you alone, strike terror! Who can hold his ground in your presence when your anger strikes? 

Psa 76:8 From heaven your verdicts thunder, the earth is silent with dread 

Psa 76:9 when God takes his stand to give judgement, to save all the humble of the earth. Pause 

Psa 76:10 Human anger serves only to praise you, the survivors of your anger will huddle round you. 

Psa 76:1 1 Make and fulfil your vows to Yahweh your God, let those who surround him make offerings to the 
Awesome One. 

Psa 76:12 He cuts short the breath of princes, strikes terror in earthly kings. 

Psa 77:1 [For the choirmaster … Jeduthun Of Asaph Psalm] I cry to God in distress, I cry to God and he hears 
me. 

Psa 77:2 In the day of my distress I sought the Lord; all night I tirelessly stretched out my hands, my heart 
refused to be consoled. 

Psa 77:3 I sigh as I think of God, my spirit faints away as I ponder on him. Pause 
Psa 77:4 You kept me from closing my eyes, I was too distraught to speak; 

Psa 77:5 I thought of former times, years long past 

Psa 77:6 I recalled; through the night I ponder in my heart, as I reflect, my spirit asks this question: 

Psa 77:7 Is the Lord’s rejection final? Will he never show favour again? 

Psa 77:8 Is his faithful love gone for ever? Has his Word come to an end for all time? 

Psa 77:9 Does God forget to show mercy? In anger does he shut off his tenderness?Pause 

Psa 77:10 And I said, “This is what wounds me, the right hand of the Most High has lost its strength”. 

Psa 77:1 1 Remembering Yahweh’s great deeds, remembering your wonders in the past, 

Psa 77:12 I reflect on all that you did, I ponder all your great deeds. 

Psa 77:13 God, your ways are holy! What god is as great as our God? 

Psa 77:14 You are the God who does marvellous deeds, brought nations to acknowledge your power, 

Psa 77:15 with your own arm redeeming your people, the children of Jacob and Joseph. Pause 

Psa 77:16 When the waters saw you, God, when the waters saw you they writhed in anguish, the very depths 

shook with fear. 

Psa 77:17 The clouds pelted down water, the sky thundered, your arrows shot back and forth. 

Psa 77:18 The rolling of your thunder was heard, your lightning-flashes lit up the world, the earth shuddered and 
shook. 

Psa 77:19 Your way led over the sea, your path over the countless waters, and none could trace your footsteps. 
Psa 77:20 You guided your people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron. 

Psa 78:1 [Psalm Of Asaph] My people, listen to my teaching, pay attention to what I say. 

Psa 78:2 I will speak to you in poetry, unfold the mysteries of the past. 

Psa 78:3 What we have heard and know, what our ancestors have told us 

Psa 78:4 we shall not conceal from their descendants, but will tell to a generation still to come: the praises of 
Yahweh, his power, the wonderful deeds he has done. 

Psa 78:5 He instituted a witness in Jacob, he established a law in Israel, he commanded our ancestors to hand 
it down to their descendants, 

Psa 78:6 that a generation still to come might know it, children yet to be born. They should be sure to tell their 
own children, 

Psa 78:7 and should put their trust in God, never forgetting God’s great deeds, always keeping his commands, 
Psa 78:8 and not, like their ancestors, be a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation weak of purpose, 
their spirit fickle towards God. 

Psa 78:9 The archer sons of Ephraim turned tail when the time came for fighting; 

Psa 78:10 they failed to keep God’s covenant, they refused to follow his Law; 

Psa 78:1 1 they had forgotten his great deeds, the marvels he had shown them; 

Psa 78:12 he did marvels in the sight of their ancestors in Egypt, in the plains of Tanis. 

Psa 78:13 He split the sea and brought them through, made the waters stand up like a dam; 



Psa 78:14 he led them with a cloud by day, and all the night with the light of a fire; 

Psa 78:15 he split rocks in the desert, let them drink as though from the limitless depths; 

Psa 78:16 he brought forth streams from a rock, made waters flow down in torrents. 

Psa 78:17 But they only sinned against him more than ever, defying the Most High in barren country; 

Psa 78:18 they deliberately challenged God by demanding food to their hearts’ content. 

Psa 78:19 They insulted God by saying, “Can God make a banquet in the desert? 

Psa 78:20 True, when he struck the rock, waters gushed out and flowed in torrents; but what of bread? Can he 
give that, can he provide meat for his people?”. 

Psa 78:21 When he heard them Yahweh vented his anger, fire blazed against Jacob, his anger mounted 
against Israel, 

Psa 78:22 because they had no faith in God, no trust in his power to save. 

Psa 78:23 Even so he gave orders to the skies above, he opened the sluice-gates of heaven; 

Psa 78:24 he rained down manna to feed them, he gave them the wheat of heaven; 

Psa 78:25 mere mortals ate the bread of the Mighty, he sent them as much food as they could want. 

Psa 78:26 He roused an east wind in the heavens, despatched a south wind by his strength; 

Psa 78:27 he rained down meat on them like dust, birds thick as sand on the seashore, 

Psa 78:28 tumbling into the middle of his camp, all around his dwelling-place. 

Psa 78:29 They ate as much food as they wanted, he satisfied all their cravings; 

Psa 78:30 but their cravings were still upon them, the food was still in their mouths, 

Psa 78:31 when the wrath of God attacked them, slaughtering their strongest men, laying low the flower of 
Israel. 

Psa 78:32 Despite all this, they went on sinning, they put no faith in his marvels. 

Psa 78:33 He made their days vanish in mist, their years in sudden ruin. 

Psa 78:34 Whenever he slaughtered them, they began to seek him, they turned back and looked eagerly for 
him, 

Psa 78:35 recalling that God was their rock, God the Most High, their redeemer. 

Psa 78:36 They tried to hoodwink him with their mouths, their tongues were deceitful towards him; 

Psa 78:37 their hearts were not loyal to him, they were not faithful to his covenant. 

Psa 78:38 But in his compassion he forgave their guilt instead of killing them, time and again repressing his 
anger instead of rousing his full wrath, 

Psa 78:39 remembering they were creatures of flesh, a breath of wind that passes, never to return. 

Psa 78:40 How often they defied him in the desert! How often they grieved him in the wastelands! 

Psa 78:41 Repeatedly they challenged God, provoking the Holy One of Israel, 

Psa 78:42 not remembering his hand, the time when he saved them from the oppressor, 

Psa 78:43 he who did his signs in Egypt, his miracles in the plains of Tanis, 

Psa 78:44 turning their rivers to blood, their streams so that they had nothing to drink. 

Psa 78:45 He sent horseflies to eat them up, and frogs to devastate them, 

Psa 78:46 consigning their crops to the caterpillar, the fruit of their hard work to the locust; 

Psa 78:47 he killed their vines with hail, their sycamore trees with frost, 

Psa 78:48 delivering up their cattle to hail, and their flocks to thunderbolts. 

Psa 78:49 He loosed against them the full heat of his anger, fury, rage and destruction, a detachment of 
destroying angels; 

Psa 78:50 he gave free course to his anger. He did not exempt their own selves from death, delivering up their 
lives to the plague. 

Psa 78:51 He struck all the first-born in Egypt, the flower of the youth in the tents of Ham. 

Psa 78:52 He brought out his people like sheep, guiding them like a flock in the desert, 

Psa 78:53 leading them safe and unafraid, while the sea engulfed their enemies. 

Psa 78:54 He brought them to his holy land, the hill-country won by his right hand; 

Psa 78:55 he dispossessed nations before them, measured out a heritage for each of them, and settled the 
tribes of Israel in their tents. 

Psa 78:56 But still they challenged the Most High God and defied him, refusing to keep his decrees; 

Psa 78:57 as perverse and treacherous as their ancestors, they gave way like a faulty bow, 

Psa 78:58 provoking him with their high places, rousing his jealousy with their idols. 

Psa 78:59 God listened and vented his wrath, he totally rejected Israel; 

Psa 78:60 he forsook his dwelling in Shiloh, the tent where he used to dwell on the earth. 

Psa 78:61 He abandoned his power to captivity, his splendour to the enemy’s clutches; 

Psa 78:62 he gave up his people to the sword, he vented his wrath on his own heritage. 

Psa 78:63 Fire devoured their young men, their young girls had no wedding-song; 

Psa 78:64 their priests fell by the sword and their widows sang no dirge. 



Psa 78:65 The Lord arose as though he had been asleep, like a strong man fighting-mad with wine, 

Psa 78:66 he struck his enemies on the rump, and put them to everlasting shame. 

Psa 78:67 Rejecting the tents of Joseph, passing over the tribe of Ephraim, 

Psa 78:68 he chose the tribe of Judah, his well-loved mountain of Zion; 

Psa 78:69 he built his sanctuary like high hills, like the earth set it firm for ever. 

Psa 78:70 He chose David to be his servant, took him from the sheepfold, 

Psa 78:71 took him from tending ewes to pasture his servant Jacob, and Israel his heritage. 

Psa 78:72 He pastured them with unblemished heart, with a sensitive hand he led them. 

Psa 79:1 [Psalm Of Asaph] God, the pagans have invaded your heritage, they have defiled your holy temple, 
they have laid Jerusalem in ruins, 

Psa 79:2 they have left the corpses of your servants as food for the birds of the air, the bodies of your faithful for 
the wild beasts. 

Psa 79:3 Around Jerusalem they have shed blood like water, leaving no one to bury them. 

Psa 79:4 We are the scorn of our neighbours, the butt and laughing-stock of those around us. 

Psa 79:5 How long will you be angry, Yahweh? For ever? Is your jealousy to go on smouldering like a fire? 

Psa 79:6 Pour out your anger on the nations who do not acknowledge you, and on the kingdoms that do not call 
on your name; 

Psa 79:7 for they have devoured Jacob and devastated his home. 

Psa 79:8 Do not count against us the guilt of former generations, in your tenderness come quickly to meet us, 
for we are utterly weakened; 

Psa 79:9 help us, God our Saviour, for the glory of your name; Yahweh, wipe away our sins, rescue us for the 
sake of your name. 

Psa 79:10 Why should the nations ask, “Where is their God?”. Let us see the nations suffer vengeance for 
shedding your servants’ blood. 

Psa 79:1 1 May the groans of the captive reach you, by your great strength save those who are condemned to 
death! 

Psa 79:12 Repay our neighbours sevenfold for the insults they have levelled at you, Lord. 

Psa 79:13 And we, your people, the flock that you pasture, will thank you for ever, will recite your praises from 
age to age. 

Psa 80:1 [For the choirmaster Tune: “The decrees are lilies’ Of Asaph Psalm] Shepherd of Israel, listen, you who 

lead Joseph like a flock, enthroned on the winged creatures, shine forth 

Psa 80:2 over Ephraim, Benjamin and Manasseh; rouse your valour and come to our help. 

Psa 80:3 God, bring us back, let your face shine on us and we shall be safe. 

Psa 80:4 Yahweh, God Sabaoth, how long will you flare up at your people’s prayer? 

Psa 80:5 You have made tears their food, redoubled tears their drink. 

Psa 80:6 You let our neighbours quarrel over us, our enemies mock us. 

Psa 80:7 God Sabaoth, bring us back, let your face shine on us and we shall be safe. 

Psa 80:8 You brought a vine out of Egypt, to plant it you drove out nations; 

Psa 80:9 you cleared a space for it, it took root and filled the whole country. 

Psa 80:10 The mountains were covered with its shade, and the cedars of God with its branches, 

Psa 80:1 1 its boughs stretched as far as the sea, its shoots as far as the River. 

Psa 80:12 Why have you broken down its fences? Every passer-by plucks its grapes, 

Psa 80:13 boars from the forest tear at it, wild beasts feed on it. 

Psa 80:14 God Sabaoth, come back, we pray, look down from heaven and see, visit this vine; 

Psa 80:15 protect what your own hand has planted. 

Psa 80:16 They have thrown it on the fire like dung, the frown of your rebuke will destroy them. 

Psa 80:17 May your hand protect those at your side, the child of Adam you have strengthened for yourself! 

Psa 80:18 Never again will we turn away from you, give us life and we will call upon your name. 

Psa 80:19 God Sabaoth, bring us back, let your face shine on us and we shall be safe. 

Psa 81:1 [For the choirmaster On the … of Gath Of Asaph] Sing for joy to God our strength, shout in triumph to 
the God of Jacob. 

Psa 81 :2 Strike up the music, beat the tambourine, play the melodious harp and the lyre; 

Psa 81 :3 blow the trumpet for the new month, for the full moon, for our feast day! 

Psa 81 :4 For Israel has this statute, a decision of the God of Jacob, 

Psa 81 :5 a decree he imposed on Joseph, when he went to war against Egypt. I heard a voice unknown to me, 
Psa 81 :6 “I freed his shoulder from the burden, his hands were able to lay aside the labourer’s basket. 

Psa 81:7 You cried out in your distress, so I rescued you. “Hidden in the storm, I answered you, I tested you at 
the waters of Meribah. Pause 

Psa 81 :8 Listen, my people, while I give you warning; Israel, if only you would listen to me! 



Psa 81 :9 “You shall have no strange gods, shall worship no alien god. 

Psa 81:10 I, Yahweh, am your God, who brought you here from Egypt, you have only to open your mouth for 
me to fill it. 

Psa 81:11 “My people would not listen to me, Israel would have none of me. 

Psa 81:12 Sol left them to their stubborn selves, to follow their own devices. 

Psa 81:13 “If only my people would listen to me, if only Israel would walk in my ways, 

Psa 81:14 at one stroke I would subdue their enemies, turn my hand against their opponents. 

Psa 81:15 “Those who hate Yahweh would woo his favour, though their doom was sealed for ever, 

Psa 81:16 while I would feed him on pure wheat, would give you your fill of honey from the rock”. 

Psa 82:1 [Psalm Of Asaph] God takes his stand in the divine assembly, surrounded by the gods he gives 
judgement. 

Psa 82:2 “How much longer will you give unjust judgements and uphold the prestige of the wicked? 

Psa 82:3 Let the weak and the orphan have justice, be fair to the wretched and the destitute. Pause 
Psa 82:4 “Rescue the weak and the needy, save them from the clutches of the wicked. 

Psa 82:5 “Ignorant and uncomprehending, they wander in darkness, while the foundations of the world are 
tottering. 

Psa 82:6 I had thought, ‘Are you gods, are all of you sons of the Most High?’. 

Psa 82:7 No! you will die as human beings do, as one man, princes, you will fall”. 

Psa 82:8 Arise, God, judge the world, for all nations belong to you. 

Psa 83:1 [Song Psalm Of Asaph] God, do not remain silent, do not stay quiet or unmoved, God! 

Psa 83:2 See how your enemies are in uproar, how those who hate you are rearing their heads. 

Psa 83:3 They are laying plans against your people, conspiring against those you cherish; 

Psa 83:4 they say, “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation, the name of Israel shall be remembered no more!”. 
Psa 83:5 They conspire with a single mind, they conclude an alliance against you, 

Psa 83:6 the tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites, Moab and the Hagrites, 

Psa 83:7 Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, Philistia and the Tyrians; 

Psa 83:8 even Assyria has joined them to reinforce the children of Lot.Pause 
Psa 83:9 Treat them like Midian and Sisera, like Jabin at the river Kishon; 

Psa 83:10 wiped out at En-Dor, they served to manure the ground. 

Psa 83:1 1 Treat their leaders like Oreb and Zeeb, all their commanders like Zebah and Zalmunna, 

Psa 83:12 for they said, “Let us take for ourselves God’s settlements”. 

Psa 83:13 My God, treat them like thistledown, like chaff at the mercy of the wind. 

Psa 83:14 As fire devours a forest, as a flame sets mountains ablaze, 

Psa 83:15 so drive them away with your tempest, by your whirlwind fill them with terror. 

Psa 83:16 Shame written all over their faces, let them seek your name, Yahweh! 

Psa 83:17 Dishonour and terror be always theirs, death also and destruction. 

Psa 83:18 Let them know that you alone bear the name of Yahweh, Most High overall the earth. 

Psa 84:1 [For the choirmaster On the … of Gath Of the sons of Korah Psalm] How lovely are your dwelling- 
places, Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Psa 84:2 My whole being yearns and pines for Yahweh’s courts, My heart and my body cry out for joy to the 
living God. 

Psa 84:3 Even the sparrow has found a home, the swallow a nest to place its young: your altars, Yahweh 
Sabaoth, my King and my God. 

Psa 84:4 How blessed are those who live in your house; they shall praise you continually. Pause 
Psa 84:5 Blessed those who find their strength in you, whose hearts are set on pilgrimage. 

Psa 84:6 As they pass through the Valley of the Balsam, they make there a water-hole, and — a further blessing 
— early rain fills it. 

Psa 84:7 They make their way from height to height, God shows himself to them in Zion. 

Psa 84:8 Yahweh, God Sabaoth, hear my prayer, listen, God of Jacob. 

Psa 84:9 God, our shield, look, and see the face of your anointed. 

Psa 84:10 Better one day in your courts than a thousand at my own devices, to stand on the threshold of God’s 
house than to live in the tents of the wicked. 

Psa 84:1 1 For Yahweh God is a rampart and shield, he gives grace and glory; Yahweh refuses nothing good to 
those whose life is blameless. 

Psa 84:12 Yahweh Sabaoth, blessed is he who trusts in you. 

Psa 85:1 [For the choirmaster Of the sons of Korah Psalm] Yahweh, you are gracious to your land, you bring 
back the captives of Jacob, 

Psa 85:2 you take away the guilt of your people, you blot out all their sin. Pause 
Psa 85:3 You retract all your anger, you renounce the heat of your fury. 



Psa 85:4 Bring us back, God our Saviour, appease your indignation against us! 

Psa 85:5 Will you be angry with us for ever? Will you prolong your wrath age after age? 

Psa 85:6 Will you not give us life again, for your people to rejoice in you? 

Psa 85:7 Show us, Lord, your faithful love, grant us your saving help. 

Psa 85:8 I am listening. What is God’s message? Yahweh’s message is peace for his people, for his faithful, if 
only they renounce their folly. 

Psa 85:9 His saving help is near for those who fear him, his glory will dwell in our land. 

Psa 85:10 Faithful Love and Loyalty join together, Saving Justice and Peace embrace. 

Psa 85:1 1 Loyalty will spring up from the earth, and Justice will lean down from heaven. 

Psa 85:12 Yahweh will himself give prosperity, and our soil will yield its harvest. 

Psa 85:13 Justice will walk before him, treading out a path. 

Psa 86:1 [Prayer Of David] Listen to me, Yahweh, answer me, for I am poor and needy. 

Psa 86:2 Guard me, for I am faithful, save your servant who relies on you. You are my God, 

Psa 86:3 take pity on me, Lord, for to you I cry all the day. 

Psa 86:4 Fill your servant’s heart with joy, Lord, for to you I raise up my heart. 

Psa 86:5 Lord, you are kind and forgiving, rich in faithful love for all who call upon you. 

Psa 86:6 Yahweh, hear my prayer, listen to the sound of my pleading. 

Psa 86:7 In my day of distress I call upon you, because you answer me, Lord; 

Psa 86:8 among the gods there is none to compare with you, no great deeds to compare with yours. 

Psa 86:9 All nations will come and adore you, Lord, and give glory to your name. 

Psa 86:10 For you are great and do marvellous deeds, you, God, and none other. 

Psa 86:1 1 Teach me, Yahweh, your ways, that I may not stray from your loyalty; let my heart’s one aim be to 
fear your name. 

Psa 86:12 I thank you with all my heart, Lord my God, I will glorify your name for ever, 

Psa 86:13 for your faithful love for me is so great that you have rescued me from the depths of Sheol. 

Psa 86:14 Arrogant men, God, are rising up against me, a brutal gang is after my life, in their scheme of things 
you have no place. 

Psa 86:15 But you, Lord, God of tenderness and mercy, slow to anger, rich in faithful love and loyalty, 

Psa 86:16 turn to me and pity me. Give to your servant your strength, to the child of your servant your saving 
help, 

Psa 86:17 give me a sign of your kindness. 

Psa 86:18 My enemies will see to their shame that you, Yahweh, help and console me. 

Psa 87:1 [Of the sons of Korah Psalm Song] With its foundations on the holy mountains, 

Psa 87:2 Yahweh loves his city, he prefers the gates of Zion to any dwelling-place in Jacob. 

Psa 87:3 He speaks of glory for you, city of God, Pause 

Psa 87:4 “I number Rahab and Babylon among those that acknowledge me; look at Tyre, Philistia, Ethiopia, so 
and so was born there”. 

Psa 87:5 But of Zion it will be said, “Every one was born there”, her guarantee is the Most High. 

Psa 87:6 Yahweh in his register of peoples will note against each, “Born there”, Pause 
Psa 87:7 princes no less than native-born; all make their home in you. 

Psa 88:1 [Song Psalm Of the sons of Korah In sickness In suffering Poem For Heman the native-born] Yahweh, 
God of my salvation, when I cry out to you in the night, 

Psa 88:2 may my prayer reach your presence, hear my cry for help. 

Psa 88:3 For I am filled with misery, my life is on the brink of Sheol; 

Psa 88:4 already numbered among those who sink into oblivion, I am as one bereft of strength, 

Psa 88:5 left alone among the dead, like the slaughtered lying in the grave, whom you remember no more, cut 
off as they are from your protection. 

Psa 88:6 You have plunged me to the bottom of the grave, in the darkness, in the depths; 

Psa 88:7 weighted down by your anger, kept low by your waves. Pause 

Psa 88:8 You have deprived me of my friends, made me repulsive to them, imprisoned, with no escape; 

Psa 88:9 my eyes are worn out with suffering. I call to you, Yahweh, all day, I stretch out my hands to you. 

Psa 88:10 Do you work wonders for the dead, can shadows rise up to praise you?Pause 

Psa 88:1 1 Do they speak in the grave of your faithful love, of your constancy in the place of perdition? 

Psa 88:12 Are your wonders known in the darkness, your saving justice in the land of oblivion? 

Psa 88:13 But, for my part, I cry to you, Yahweh, every morning my prayer comes before you; 

Psa 88:14 why, Yahweh, do you rebuff me, turn your face away from me? 

Psa 88:15 Wretched and close to death since childhood, I have borne your terrors — I am finished! 

Psa 88:16 Your anger has overwhelmed me, your terrors annihilated me. 

Psa 88:17 They flood around me all day long, close in on me all at once. 



Psa 88:18 You have deprived me of friends and companions, and all that I know is the dark. 

Psa 89:1 [Poem For Ethan the native-born] I shall sing the faithful love of Yahweh for ever, from age to age my 
lips shall declare your constancy, 

Psa 89:2 for you have said: love is built to last for ever, you have fixed your constancy firm in the heavens. 

Psa 89:3 “I have made a covenant with my Chosen One, sworn an oath to my servant David: 

Psa 89:4 I have made your dynasty firm for ever, built your throne stable age after age. “Pause 
Psa 89:5 The heavens praise your wonders, Yahweh, your constancy in the gathering of your faithful. 

Psa 89:6 Who in the skies can compare with Yahweh? Who among the sons of god can rival him? 

Psa 89:7 God, awesome in the assembly of holy ones, great and dreaded among all who surround him, 

Psa 89:8 Yahweh, God Sabaoth, who is like you? Mighty Yahweh, your constancy is all round you! 

Psa 89:9 You control the pride of the ocean, when its waves ride high you calm them. 

Psa 89:10 You split Rahab in two like a corpse, scattered your enemies with your mighty arm. 

Psa 89:1 1 Yours are the heavens and yours the earth, the world and all it holds, you founded them; 

Psa 89:12 you created the north and the south, Tabor and Hermon hail your name with joy. 

Psa 89:13 Yours is a strong arm, mighty your hand, your right hand raised high; 

Psa 89:14 Saving Justice and Fair Judgement the foundations of your throne, Faithful Love and Constancy 
march before you. 

Psa 89:15 How blessed the nation that learns to acclaim you! They will live, Yahweh, in the light of your 
presence. 

Psa 89:16 In your name they rejoice all day long, by your saving justice they are raised up. 

Psa 89:17 You are the flower of their strength, by your favour our strength is triumphant; 

Psa 89:18 for to Yahweh belongs our shield, to the Holy One of Israel our king. 

Psa 89:19 Once you spoke in a vision, to your faithful you said: “I have given strength to a warrior, I have raised 
up a man chosen from my people. 

Psa 89:20 “I have found David my servant, and anointed him with my holy oil. 

Psa 89:21 My hand will always be with him, my arm will make him strong. 

Psa 89:22 “No enemy will be able to outwit him, no wicked man overcome him; 

Psa 89:23 I shall crush his enemies before him, strike his opponents dead. 

Psa 89:24 “My constancy and faithful love will be with him, in my name his strength will be triumphant. 

Psa 89:25 I shall establish his power over the sea, his dominion over the rivers. 

Psa 89:26 “He will cry to me, ‘You are my father, my God, the rock of my salvation!’. 

Psa 89:27 So I shall make him my first-born, the highest of earthly kings. 

Psa 89:28 “I shall maintain my faithful love for him always, my covenant with him will stay firm. 

Psa 89:29 I have established his dynasty for ever, his throne to be as lasting as the heavens. 

Psa 89:30 “Should his descendants desert my law, and not keep to my rulings, 

Psa 89:31 should they violate my statutes, and not observe my commandments, 

Psa 89:32 “then I shall punish their offences with the rod, their guilt with the whip, 

Psa 89:33 but I shall never withdraw from him my faithful love, I shall not belie my constancy. 

Psa 89:34 “I shall not violate my covenant, I shall not withdraw the word once spoken. 

Psa 89:35 I have sworn by my holiness, once and for all, never will I break faith with David. 

Psa 89:36 “His dynasty shall endure for ever, his throne like the sun before me, 

Psa 89:37 as the moon is established for ever, a faithful witness in the skies. “Pause 

Psa 89:38 Yet you yourself— you have spurned and rejected, and have vented your wrath on your anointed, 
Psa 89:39 you have repudiated the covenant with your servant, dishonoured his crown in the dust. 

Psa 89:40 You have pierced all his defences, and laid his strongholds in ruins, 

Psa 89:41 everyone passing by plunders him, he has become the butt of his neighbours. 

Psa 89:42 You have raised high the right hand of his opponents, have made all his enemies happy; 

Psa 89:43 you have snapped off his sword on a rock, and failed to support him in battle. 

Psa 89:44 You have stripped him of his splendid sceptre, and toppled his throne to the ground. 

Psa 89:45 You have aged him before his time, enveloped him in shame. Pause 

Psa 89:46 How long, Yahweh, will you remain hidden? For ever? Is your anger to go on smouldering like a fire? 
Psa 89:47 Remember me; how long have I left? For what pointless end did you create all the children of Adam? 
Psa 89:48 Who can live and never see death? Who can save himself from the clutches of Sheol?Pause 
Psa 89:49 Lord, what of those pledges of your faithful love? You made an oath to David by your constancy. 

Psa 89:50 Do not forget the insults to your servant; I take to heart the taunts of the nations, 

Psa 89:51 which your enemies have levelled, Yahweh, have levelled at the footsteps of your anointed! 

Psa 89:52 Blessed be Yahweh for ever. Amen, Amen. 

Psa 90:1 [Prayer Of Moses, man of God] Lord, you have been our refuge from age to age. 

Psa 90:2 Before the mountains were born, before the earth and the world came to birth, from eternity to eternity 



you are God. 

Psa 90:3 You bring human beings to the dust, by saying, “Return, children of Adam”. 

Psa 90:4 A thousand years are to you like a yesterday which has passed, like a watch of the night. 

Psa 90:5 You flood them with sleep — in the morning they will be like growing grass: 

Psa 90:6 in the morning it is blossoming and growing, by evening it is withered and dry. 

Psa 90:7 For we have been destroyed by your wrath, dismayed by your anger. 

Psa 90:8 You have taken note of our guilty deeds, our secrets in the full light of your presence. 

Psa 90:9 All our days pass under your wrath, our lives are over like a sigh. 

Psa 90:10 The span of our life is seventy years — eighty for those who are strong — but their whole extent is 
anxiety and trouble, they are over in a moment and we are gone. 

Psa 90:1 1 Who feels the power of your anger, or who that fears you, your wrath? 

Psa 90:12 Teach us to count up the days that are ours, and we shall come to the heart of wisdom. 

Psa 90:13 Come back, Yahweh! Flow long must we wait? Take pity on your servants. 

Psa 90:14 Each morning fill us with your faithful love, we shall sing and be happy all our days; 

Psa 90:15 let our joy be as long as the time that you afflicted us, the years when we experienced disaster. 

Psa 90:16 Show your servants the deeds you do, let their children enjoy your splendour! 

Psa 90:17 May the sweetness of the Lord be upon us, to confirm the work we have done! 

Psa 91:1 You who live in the secret place of Elyon, spend your nights in the shelter of Shaddai, 

Psa 91:2 saying to Yahweh, “My refuge, my fortress, my God in whom I trust!”. 

Psa 91 :3 Fie rescues you from the snare of the fowler set on destruction; 

Psa 91 :4 he covers you with his pinions, you find shelter under his wings. His constancy is shield and 
protection. 

Psa 91 :5 You need not fear the terrors of night, the arrow that flies in the daytime, 

Psa 91 :6 the plague that stalks in the darkness, the scourge that wreaks havoc at high noon. 

Psa 91 :7 Though a thousand fall at your side, ten thousand at your right hand, you yourself will remain 
unscathed. 

Psa 91 :8 You have only to keep your eyes open to see how the wicked are repaid, 

Psa 91 :9 you who say, “Yahweh my refuge!”. and make Elyon your fortress. 

Psa 91:10 No disaster can overtake you, no plague come near your tent; 

Psa 91:11 he has given his angels orders about you to guard you wherever you go. 

Psa 91:12 They will carry you in their arms in case you trip over a stone. 

Psa 91:13 You will walk upon wild beast and adder, you will trample young lions and snakes. 

Psa 91:14 “Since he clings to me I rescue him, I raise him high, since he acknowledges my name. 

Psa 91:15 He calls to me and I answer him: in distress I am at his side, I rescue him and bring him honour. 

Psa 91:16 I shall satisfy him with long life, and grant him to see my salvation”. 

Psa 92:1 [Psalm Song For the Sabbath] It is good to give thanks to Yahweh, to make music for your name, Most 
High, 

Psa 92:2 to proclaim your faithful love at daybreak, and your constancy all through the night, 

Psa 92:3 on the lyre, the ten-stringed lyre, to the murmur of the harp. 

Psa 92:4 You have brought me joy, Yahweh, by your deeds, at the work of your hands I cry out, 

Psa 92:5 “How great are your works, Yahweh, immensely deep your thoughts!”. 

Psa 92:6 Stupid people cannot realise this, fools do not grasp it. 

Psa 92:7 The wicked may sprout like weeds, and every evil-doer flourish, but only to be eternally destroyed; 

Psa 92:8 whereäs you are supreme for ever, Yahweh. 

Psa 92:9 Look how your enemies perish, how all evil-doers are scattered! 

Psa 92:10 You give me the strength of the wild ox, you anoint me with fresh oil; 

Psa 92:1 1 I caught sight of the ambush against me, overheard the plans of the wicked. 

Psa 92:12 The upright will flourish like the palm tree, will grow like a cedar of Lebanon. 

Psa 92:13 Planted in the house of Yahweh, they will flourish in the courts of our God. 

Psa 92:14 In old age they will still bear fruit, will remain fresh and green, 

Psa 92:15 to proclaim Yahweh’s integrity; my rock, in whom no fault can be found. 

Psa 93:1 Yahweh is king, robed in majesty, robed is Yahweh and girded with power. 

Psa 93:2 The world is indeed set firm, it can never be shaken; your throne is set firm from of old, from all 
eternity you exist. 

Psa 93:3 The rivers lift up, Yahweh, the rivers lift up their voices, the rivers lift up their thunder. 

Psa 93:4 Greater than the voice of many waters, more majestic than the breakers of the sea, Yahweh is 
majestic in the heights. 

Psa 93:5 Your decrees stand firm, unshakeable, holiness is the beauty of your house, Yahweh, for all time to 
come. 



Psa 94:1 God of vengeance, Yahweh, God of vengeance, shine forth! 

Psa 94:2 Arise, judge of the world, give back the proud what they deserve! 

Psa 94:3 How long are the wicked, Yahweh, how long are the wicked to triumph? 

Psa 94:4 They bluster and boast, they flaunt themselves, all the evil-doers. 

Psa 94:5 They crush your people, Yahweh, they oppress your heritage, 

Psa 94:6 they murder the widow and the stranger, bring the orphan to a violent death. 

Psa 94:7 They say, “Yahweh is not looking, the God of Jacob is taking no notice”. 

Psa 94:8 Take notice yourselves, you coarsest of people! Fools, when will you learn some sense? 

Psa 94:9 Shall he who implanted the ear not hear, he who fashioned the eye not see? 

Psa 94:10 Shall he who instructs nations not punish? Yahweh, the teacher of all people, 

Psa 94:1 1 knows human plans and how insipid they are. 

Psa 94:12 How blessed are those you instruct, Yahweh, whom you teach by means of your law, 

Psa 94:13 to give them respite in evil times, till a pit is dug for the wicked. 

Psa 94:14 Yahweh will not abandon his people, he will not desert his heritage; 

Psa 94: 1 5 for judgement will again become saving justice, and in its wake all upright hearts will follow. 

Psa 94:16 Who rises up on my side against the wicked? Who stands firm on my side against all evil-doers? 

Psa 94: 1 7 If Yahweh did not come to my help, I should soon find myself dwelling in the silence. 

Psa 94:18 I need only say, “I am slipping”, for your faithful love, Yahweh, to support me; 

Psa 94: 1 9 however great the anxiety of my heart, your consolations soothe me. 

Psa 94:20 Are you partner to a destructive court, that gives disorder the status of law? 

Psa 94:21 They make an attack on the life of the upright, and condemn innocent blood. 

Psa 94:22 No! Yahweh is a stronghold to me, my God is my rock of refuge. 

Psa 94:23 He turns back their guilt on themselves, annihilates them for their wickedness, he annihilates them, 
Yahweh our God. 

Psa 95:1 Come, let us cry out with joy to Yahweh, acclaim the rock of our salvation. 

Psa 95:2 Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving, acclaim him with music. 

Psa 95:3 For Yahweh is a great God, a king greater than all the gods. 

Psa 95:4 In his power are the depths of the earth, the peaks of the mountains are his; 

Psa 95:5 the sea belongs to him, for he made it, and the dry land, moulded by his hands. 

Psa 95:6 Come, let us bow low and do reverence; kneel before Yahweh who made us! 

Psa 95:7 For he is our God, and we the people of his sheepfold, the flock of his hand. If only you would listen to 
him today! 

Psa 95:8 Do not harden your hearts as at Meribah, as at the time of Massah in the desert, 

Psa 95:9 when your ancestors challenged me, put me to the test, and saw what I could do! 

Psa 95:10 For forty years that generation sickened me, and I said, “Always fickle hearts; they cannot grasp my 
ways”. 

Psa 95:1 1 Then in my anger I swore they would never enter my place of rest. 

Psa 96:1 Sing a new song to Yahweh! Sing to Yahweh, all the earth! 

Psa 96:2 Sing to Yahweh, bless his name! Proclaim his salvation day after day, 

Psa 96:3 declare his glory among the nations, his marvels to every people! 

Psa 96:4 Great is Yahweh, worthy of all praise, more awesome than any of the gods. 

Psa 96:5 All the gods of the nations are idols! It was Yahweh who made the heavens; 

Psa 96:6 in his presence are splendour and majesty, in his sanctuary power and beauty. 

Psa 96:7 Give to Yahweh, families of nations, give to Yahweh glory and power, 

Psa 96:8 give to Yahweh the glory due to his name! Bring an offering and enter his courts, 

Psa 96:9 adore Yahweh in the splendour of his holiness. Tremble before him, all the earth. 

Psa 96:10 Say among the nations, “Yahweh is king”. The world is set firm, it cannot be moved. He will judge the 
nations with justice. 

Psa 96:1 1 Let the heavens rejoice and earth be glad! Let the sea thunder, and all it holds! 

Psa 96:12 Let the countryside exult, and all that is in it, and all the trees of the forest cry out for joy, 

Psa 96:13 at Yahweh’s approach, for he is coming, coming to judge the earth; he will judge the world with 
saving justice, and the nations with constancy. 

Psa 97:1 Yahweh is king! Let earth rejoice, the many isles be glad! 

Psa 97:2 Cloud, black cloud enfolds him, saving justice and judgement the foundations of his throne. 

Psa 97:3 Fire goes before him, sets ablaze his enemies all around; 

Psa 97:4 his lightning-flashes light up the world, the earth sees it and quakes. 

Psa 97:5 The mountains melt like wax, before the Lord of all the earth. 

Psa 97:6 The heavens proclaim his saving justice, all nations see his glory. 

Psa 97:7 Shame on all who serve images, who pride themselves on their idols; bow down to him, all you gods! 



Psa 97:8 Zion hears and is glad, the daughters of Judah exult, because of your judgements, Yahweh. 

Psa 97:9 For you are Yahweh, Most High over all the earth, far transcending all gods. 

Psa 97:10 Yahweh loves those who hate evil, he keeps safe his faithful, rescues them from the clutches of the 
wicked. 

Psa 97:1 1 Light dawns for the upright, and joy for honest hearts. 

Psa 97:12 Rejoice in Yahweh, you who are upright, praise his unforgettable holiness. 

Psa 98:1 [Psalm] Sing a new song to Yahweh, for he has performed wonders, his saving power is in his right 
hand and his holy arm. 

Psa 98:2 Yahweh has made known his saving power, revealed his saving justice for the nations to see, 

Psa 98:3 mindful of his faithful love and his constancy to the Flouse of Israel. The whole wide world has seen 
the saving power of our God. 

Psa 98:4 Acclaim Yahweh, all the earth, burst into shouts of joy! 

Psa 98:5 Play to Yahweh on the harp, to the sound of instruments; 

Psa 98:6 to the sound of trumpet and horn, acclaim the presence of the King. 

Psa 98:7 Let the sea thunder, and all that it holds, the world and all who live in it. 

Psa 98:8 Let the rivers clap their hands, and the mountains shout for joy together, 

Psa 98:9 at Yahweh’s approach, for he is coming to judge the earth; he will judge the world with saving justice 
and the nations with fairness. 

Psa 99:1 Yahweh is king, the peoples tremble; he is enthroned on the winged creatures, the earth shivers; 

Psa 99:2 Yahweh is great in Zion. He is supreme over all nations; 

Psa 99:3 let them praise your name, great and awesome; holy is he 

Psa 99:4 and mighty! You are a king who loves justice, you established honesty, justice and uprightness; in 
Jacob it is you who are active. 

Psa 99:5 Exalt Yahweh our God, bow down at his footstool; holy is he! 

Psa 99:6 Moses and Aaron are among his priests, and Samuel, calling on his name; they called on Yahweh and 
he answered them. 

Psa 99:7 He spoke with them in the pillar of fire, they obeyed his decrees, the Law he gave them. 

Psa 99:8 Yahweh our God, you answered them, you were a God of forgiveness to them, but punished them for 
their sins. 

Psa 99:9 Exalt Yahweh our God, bow down at his holy mountain; holy is Yahweh our God! 

Psa 100:1 [Psalm For thanksgiving] Acclaim Yahweh, all the earth, 

Psa 100:2 serve Yahweh with gladness, come into his presence with songs of joy! 

Psa 100:3 Be sure that Yahweh is God, he made us, we belong to him, his people, the flock of his sheepfold. 
Psa 100:4 Come within his gates giving thanks, to his courts singing praise, give thanks to him and bless his 
name! 

Psa 1 00:5 For Yahweh is good, his faithful love is everlasting, his constancy from age to age. 

Psa 101:1 [Of David Psalm] I will sing of faithful love and judgement; to you, Yahweh, will I make music. 

Psa 101:2 I will go forward in the path of the blameless; when will you come to me? I will live in purity of heart, in 
my house, 

Psa 101:3 I will not set before my eyes anything sordid. I hate those who act crookedly; this has no attraction for 
me. 

Psa 101 :4 Let the perverse of heart keep away from me; the wicked I disregard. 

Psa 101:5 One who secretly slanders a comrade, I reduce to silence; haughty looks, proud heart, these I cannot 
abide. 

Psa 101:6 I look to the faithful of the land to be my companions, only he who walks in the path of the blameless 
shall be my servant. 

Psa 1 01 :7 There is no room in my house for anyone who practises deceit; no liar will stand his ground where I 
can see him. 

Psa 101:8 Morning after morning I reduce to silence all the wicked in the land, banishing from the city of 
Yahweh all evil-doers. 

Psa 102:1 [Prayer of someöne afflicted, who in misfortune pours out sorrows before Yahweh] Yahweh, hear my 
prayer, let my cry for help reach you. 

Psa 102:2 Do not turn away your face from me when I am in trouble; bend down and listen to me, when I call, 
be quick to answer me! 

Psa 102:3 For my days are vanishing like smoke, my bones burning like an oven; 

Psa 102:4 like grass struck by blight, my heart is withering, I forget to eat my meals. 

Psa 1 02:5 From the effort of voicing my groans my bones stick out through my skin. 

Psa 102:6 I am like a desert-owl in the wastes, a screech-owl among ruins, 

Psa 102:7 I keep vigil and moan like a lone bird on a roof. 



Psa 102:8 All day long my enemies taunt me, those who once praised me now use me as a curse. 

Psa 102:9 Ashes are the food that I eat, my drink is mingled with tears, 

Psa 102:10 because of your fury and anger, since you have raised me up only to cast me away; 

Psa 102:11 my days are like a fading shadow, I am withering up like grass. 

Psa 102:12 But you, Yahweh, are enthroned for ever, each generation in turn remembers you. 

Psa 102:13 Rise up, take pity on Zion! the time has come to have mercy on her, the moment has come; 

Psa 102:14 for your servants love her very stones, are moved to pity by her dust. 

Psa 102:15 Then will the nations revere the name of Yahweh, and all the kings of the earth your glory; 

Psa 102:16 when Yahweh builds Zion anew, he will be seen in his glory; 

Psa 102:17 he will turn to hear the prayer of the destitute, and will not treat their prayer with scorn. 

Psa 102:18 This shall be put on record for a future generation, and a people yet to be born shall praise God: 

Psa 102:19 Yahweh has leaned down from the heights of his sanctuary, has looked down from heaven to earth, 
Psa 1 02:20 to listen to the sighing of the captive, and set free those condemned to death, 

Psa 102:21 to proclaim the name of Yahweh in Zion, his praise in Jerusalem; 

Psa 102:22 nations will gather together, and kingdoms to worship Yahweh. 

Psa 102:23 In my journeying my strength has failed on the way; 

Psa 102:24 let me know the short time I have left. Do not take me away before half my days are done, for your 
years run on from age to age. 

Psa 102:25 Long ago you laid earth’s foundations, the heavens are the work of your hands. 

Psa 102:26 They pass away but you remain; they all wear out like a garment, like outworn clothes you change 
them; 

Psa 1 02:27 but you never alter, and your years never end. 

Psa 1 02:28 The children of those who serve you will dwell secure, and their descendants live on in your 
presence. 

Psa 103:1 [Of David] Bless Yahweh, my soul, from the depths of my being, his holy name; 

Psa 103:2 bless Yahweh, my soul, never forget all his acts of kindness. 

Psa 1 03:3 He forgives all your offences, cures all your diseases, 

Psa 103:4 he redeems your life from the abyss, crowns you with faithful love and tenderness; 

Psa 103:5 he contents you with good things all your life, renews your youth like an eagle’s. 

Psa 103:6 Yahweh acts with uprightness, with justice to all who are oppressed; 

Psa 103:7 he revealed to Moses his ways, his great deeds to the children of Israel. 

Psa 103:8 Yahweh is tenderness and pity, slow to anger and rich in faithful love; 

Psa 1 03:9 his indignation does not last for ever, nor his resentment remain for all time; 

Psa 103:10 he does not treat us as our sins deserve, nor repay us as befits our offences. 

Psa 103:1 1 As the height of heaven above earth, so strong is his faithful love for those who fear him. 

Psa 103:12 As the distance of east from west, so far from us does he put our faults. 

Psa 103:13 As tenderly as a father treats his children, so Yahweh treats those who fear him; 

Psa 103:14 he knows of what we are made, he remembers that we are dust. 

Psa 103:15 As for a human person — his days are like grass, he blooms like the wild flowers; 

Psa 103:16 as soon as the wind blows he is gone, never to be seen there again. 

Psa 103:17 But Yahweh’s faithful love for those who fear him is from eternity and for ever; and his saving justice 
to their children’s children; 

Psa 103:18 as long as they keep his covenant, and carefully obey his precepts. 

Psa 103:19 Yahweh has fixed his throne in heaven, his sovereign power rules over all. 

Psa 103:20 Bless Yahweh, all his angels, mighty warriors who fulfil his commands, attentive to the sound of his 

words. 

Psa 103:21 Bless Yahweh, all his armies, servants who fulfil his wishes. 

Psa 103:22 Bless Yahweh, all his works, in every place where he rules. Bless Yahweh, my soul. 

Psa 104:1 Bless Yahweh, my soul, Yahweh, my God, how great you are! Clothed in majesty and splendour, 

Psa 104:2 wearing the light as a robe! You stretch out the heavens like a tent, 

Psa 1 04:3 build your palace on the waters above, making the clouds your chariot, gliding on the wings of the 
wind, 

Psa 104:4 appointing the winds your messengers, flames of fire your servants. 

Psa 104:5 You fixed the earth on its foundations, for ever and ever it shall not be shaken; 

Psa 104:6 you covered it with the deep like a garment, the waters overtopping the mountains. 

Psa 1 04:7 At your reproof the waters fled, at the voice of your thunder they sped away, 

Psa 104:8 flowing over mountains, down valleys, to the place you had fixed for them; 

Psa 104:9 you made a limit they were not to cross, they were not to return and cover the earth. 

Psa 104:10 In the ravines you opened up springs, running down between the mountains, 



Psa 104:1 1 supplying water for all the wild beasts; the wild asses quench their thirst, 

Psa 104:12 on their banks the birds of the air make their nests, they sing among the leaves. 

Psa 104:13 From your high halls you water the mountains, satisfying the earth with the fruit of your works: 

Psa 104:14 for cattle you make the grass grow, and for people the plants they need, to bring forth food from the 
earth, 

Psa 104:15 and wine to cheer people’s hearts, oil to make their faces glow, food to make them sturdy of heart. 
Psa 104:16 The trees of Yahweh drink their fill, the cedars of Lebanon which he sowed; 

Psa 104:17 there the birds build their nests, on the highest branches the stork makes its home; 

Psa 104:18 for the wild goats there are the mountains, in the crags the coneys find refuge. 

Psa 104:19 He made the moon to mark the seasons, the sun knows when to set. 

Psa 104:20 You bring on darkness, and nightfalls, when all the forest beasts roam around; 

Psa 1 04:21 young lions roar for their prey, asking God for their food. 

Psa 104:22 The sun rises and away they steal, back to their lairs to lie down, 

Psa 1 04:23 and man goes out to work, to labour till evening falls. 

Psa 104:24 How countless are your works, Yahweh, all of them made so wisely! The earth is full of your 
creatures. 

Psa 104:25 Then there is the sea, with its vast expanses teeming with countless creatures, creatures both great 
and small; 

Psa 104:26 there ships pass to and fro, and Leviathan whom you made to sport with. 

Psa 104:27 They all depend upon you, to feed them when they need it. 

Psa 1 04:28 You provide the food they gather, your open hand gives them their fill. 

Psa 1 04:29 T urn away your face and they panic; take back their breath and they die and revert to dust. 

Psa 1 04:30 Send out your breath and life begins; you renew the face of the earth. 

Psa 1 04:31 Glory to Yahweh for ever! May Yahweh find joy in his creatures! 

Psa 104:32 At his glance the earth trembles, at his touch the mountains pour forth smoke. 

Psa 104:33 I shall sing to Yahweh all my life, make music for my God as long as I live. 

Psa 1 04:34 May my musings be pleasing to him, for Yahweh gives me joy. 

Psa 104:35 May sinners vanish from the earth, and the wicked exist no more! Bless Yahweh, my soul. 

Psa 105:1 Alleluia! Give thanks to Yahweh, call on his name, proclaim his deeds to the peoples! 

Psa 105:2 Sing to him, make music for him, recount all his wonders! 

Psa 105:3 Glory in his holy name, let the hearts that seek Yahweh rejoice! 

Psa 105:4 Seek Yahweh and his strength, tirelessly seek his presence! 

Psa 1 05:5 Remember the marvels he has done, his wonders, the judgements he has spoken. 

Psa 105:6 Stock of Abraham, his servant, children of Jacob whom he chose! 

Psa 105:7 He is Yahweh our God, his judgements touch the whole world. 

Psa 105:8 He remembers his covenant for ever, the promise he laid down for a thousand generations, 

Psa 105:9 which he concluded with Abraham, the oath he swore to Isaac. 

Psa 105:10 He established it as a statute for Jacob, an everlasting covenant with Israel, 

Psa 105:11 saying, To you I give a land, Canaan, your allotted birthright”. 

Psa 105:12 When they were insignificant in numbers, a handful of strangers in the land, 

Psa 105:13 wandering from country to country, from one kingdom and nation to another, 

Psa 105:14 he allowed no one to oppress them; for their sake he instructed kings, 

Psa 105:15 “Do not touch my anointed ones, to my prophets you may do no harm”. 

Psa 105:16 He called down famine on the land, he took away theirfood supply; 

Psa 105:17 he sent a man ahead of them, Joseph, sold as a slave. 

Psa 105:18 So his feet were weighed down with shackles, his neck was put in irons. 

Psa 105:19 In due time his prophecy was fulfilled, the word of Yahweh proved him true. 

Psa 1 05:20 The king sent orders to release him, the ruler of nations set him free; 

Psa 1 05:21 he put him in charge of his household, the ruler of all he possessed, 

Psa 105:22 to instruct his princes as he saw fit, to teach his counsellors wisdom. 

Psa 105:23 Then Israel migrated to Egypt, Jacob settled in the country of Ham. 

Psa 105:24 He made his people increase in numbers, he gave them more strength than their enemies, 

Psa 105:25 whose heart he turned to hate his own people, to double-cross his servants. 

Psa 105:26 He sent his servant Moses, and Aaron, the man of his choice. 

Psa 105:27 They worked there the wonders he commanded, marvels in the country of Ham. 

Psa 105:28 Darkness he sent, and darkness fell, but that nation defied his orders. 

Psa 105:29 He turned their rivers to blood, and killed all the fish in them. 

Psa 105:30 Their country was overrun with frogs, even in the royal apartments; 

Psa 105:31 at his word came flies, and mosquitoes throughout the country. 



Psa 105:32 He gave them hail as their rain, flames of fire in their land; 

Psa 1 05:33 he blasted their vine and their fig tree, and shattered the trees of the country. 

Psa 105:34 At his word came locusts, hoppers beyond all counting; 

Psa 105:35 they devoured every green thing in the land, devoured all the produce of the soil. 

Psa 1 05:36 He struck all the first-born in their land, the flower of all their manhood; 

Psa 1 05:37 he led Israel out with silver and gold; in their tribes there was none who stumbled. 

Psa 1 05:38 Egypt was glad at their leaving, for terror of Israel had seized them. 

Psa 105:39 He spread out a cloud to cover them, and fire to light up the night. 

Psa 105:40 They asked and he brought them quails, food from heaven to their hearts’ content; 

Psa 105:41 he opened a rock, the waters gushed out, and flowed in dry ground as a river. 

Psa 105:42 Faithful to his sacred promise, given to his servant Abraham, 

Psa 105:43 he led out his people with rejoicing, his chosen ones with shouts of joy. 

Psa 105:44 He gave them the territories of nations, they reaped the fruit of other people’s labours, 

Psa 105:45 on condition that they kept his statutes, and remained obedient to his laws. 

Psa 106:1 Alleluia! Give thanks to Yahweh, for he is good, his faithful love is everlasting! 

Psa 106:2 Who can recount all Yahweh’s triumphs, who can fully voice his praise? 

Psa 1 06:3 How blessed are those who keep to what is just, whose conduct is always upright! 

Psa 1 06:4 Remember me, Yahweh, in your love for your people. Come near to me with your saving power, 

Psa 1 06:5 let me share the happiness of your chosen ones, let me share the joy of your people, the pride of 
your heritage. 

Psa 106:6 Like our ancestors, we have sinned, we have acted wickedly, guiltily; 

Psa 1 06:7 our ancestors in Egypt never grasped the meaning of your wonders. They did not bear in mind your 
countless acts of love, at the Sea of Reeds they defied the Most High; 

Psa 1 06:8 but for the sake of his name he saved them, to make known his mighty power. 

Psa 106:9 At his rebuke the Sea of Reeds dried up, he let them pass through the deep as though it were desert, 
Psa 106:10 so he saved them from their opponents’ clutches, rescued them from the clutches of their enemies. 
Psa 106:11 The waters enveloped their enemies, not one of whom was left. 

Psa 106:12 Then they believed what he had said, and sang his praises. 

Psa 106:13 But they soon forgot his achievements, they did not even wait for his plans; 

Psa 106:14 they were overwhelmed with greed in the wastelands, in the solitary wastes they challenged God. 
Psa 106:15 He gave them all they asked for, but struck them with a deep wasting sickness; 

Psa 106:16 in the camp they grew jealous of Moses, and of Aaron, Yahweh’s holy one. 

Psa 106:17 The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, closed in on Abiram’s faction; 

Psa 106:18 fire flamed out against their faction, the renegades were engulfed in flames. 

Psa 106:19 At Horeb they made a calf, bowed low before cast metal; 

Psa 1 06:20 they exchanged their glory for the image of a grass-eating bull. 

Psa 1 06:21 They forgot the God who was saving them, who had done great deeds in Egypt, 

Psa 106:22 such wonders in the land of Ham, such awesome deeds at the Sea of Reeds. 

Psa 106:23 He thought of putting an end to them, had not Moses, his chosen one, taken a stand in the breach 
and confronted him, to turn his anger away from destroying them. 

Psa 106:24 They counted a desirable land for nothing, they put no trust in his promise; 

Psa 1 06:25 they stayed in their tents and grumbled, they would not listen to Yahweh’s voice. 

Psa 106:26 So he lifted his hand against them, to strike them down in the desert, 

Psa 106:27 to strike down their descendants among the nations, to scatter them all over the world. 

Psa 106:28 They committed themselves to serve Baal-Peor, and ate sacrifices made to lifeless gods. 

Psa 106:29 They so provoked him by their actions that a plague broke out among them. 

Psa 106:30 Then up stood Phinehas to intervene, and the plague was checked; 

Psa 1 06:31 for this he is the example of uprightness, from age to age for ever. 

Psa 106:32 At the waters of Meribah they so angered Yahweh, that Moses suffered on their account, 

Psa 106:33 for they had embittered his spirit, and he spoke without due thought. 

Psa 106:34 They did not destroy the nations, as Yahweh had told them to do, 

Psa 106:35 but intermarried with them, and adopted their ways. 

Psa 106:36 They worshipped those nations’ false gods, till they found themselves entrapped, 

Psa 106:37 and sacrificed their own sons and their daughters to demons. 

Psa 1 06:38 Innocent blood they shed, the blood of their sons and daughters; offering them to the idols of 
Canaan, they polluted the country with blood. 

Psa 1 06:39 They defiled themselves by such actions, their behaviour was that of a harlot. 

Psa 106:40 Yahweh’s anger blazed out at his people, his own heritage filled him with disgust. 

Psa 1 06:41 He handed them over to the nations, and their opponents became their masters; 



Psa 1 06:42 their enemies lorded it over them, crushing them under their rule. 

Psa 1 06:43 Time and again he rescued them, but they still defied him deliberately, and sank ever deeper in their 
guilt; 

Psa 106:44 even so he took pity on their distress, as soon as he heard them cry out. 

Psa 106:45 Bearing his covenant with them in mind, he relented in his boundless and faithful love; 

Psa 1 06:46 he ensured that they received compassion, in their treatment by all their captors. 

Psa 106:47 Save us, Yahweh our God, gather us from among the nations, that we may give thanks to your holy 
name, and may glory in praising you. 

Psa 106:48 Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Israel, from all eternity and for ever! Let all the people say, “Amen 1 . 
Psa 107:1 Alleluia! Give thanks to Yahweh for he is good, his faithful love lasts for ever. 

Psa 107:2 So let them say whom Yahweh redeemed, whom he redeemed from the power of their enemies, 

Psa 107:3 bringing them back from foreign lands, from east and west, north and south. 

Psa 107:4 They were wandering in the desert, in the wastelands, could find no way to an inhabited city; 

Psa 107:5 they were hungry and thirsty, their life was ebbing away. 

Psa 107:6 They cried out to Yahweh in their distress, he rescued them from their plight, 

Psa 107:7 he set them on the road, straight to an inhabited city. 

Psa 107:8 Let them thank Yahweh for his faithful love, for his wonders for the children of Adam! 

Psa 107:9 He has fed the hungry to their hearts’ content, filled the starving with good things. 

Psa 107:10 Sojourners in gloom and shadow dark as death, fettered in misery and chains, 

Psa 107:11 for defying the orders of Yahweh, for scorning the plan of the Most High- 
Psa 107:12 he subdued their spirit by hard labour; if they fell there was no one to help. 

Psa 107:13 They cried out to Yahweh in their distress, he rescued them from their plight, 

Psa 107:14 he brought them out from gloom and shadow dark as death, and shattered their chains. 

Psa 107:15 Let them thank Yahweh for his faithful love, for his wonders for the children of Adam! 

Psa 107:16 He broke open gates of bronze and smashed iron bars. 

Psa 107:17 Fools for their rebellious ways, wretched because of their sins, 

Psa 107:18 finding all food repugnant, brought close to the gates of death- 

Psa 107:19 they cried out to Yahweh in their distress; he rescued them from their plight, 

Psa 107:20 he sent out his word and cured them, and rescued their life from the abyss. 

Psa 107:21 Let them thank Yahweh for his faithful love, for his wonders for the children of Adam! 

Psa 107:22 Let them offer thanksgiving sacrifices, and recount with shouts of joy what he has done! 

Psa 107:23 Voyagers on the sea in ships, plying their trade on the great ocean, 

Psa 107:24 have seen the works of Yahweh, his wonders in the deep. 

Psa 107:25 By his word he raised a storm-wind, lashing up towering waves. 

Psa 107:26 Up to the sky then down to the depths! Their stomachs were turned to water; 

Psa 107:27 they staggered and reeled like drunkards, and all their skill went under. 

Psa 107:28 They cried out to Yahweh in their distress, he rescued them from their plight, 

Psa 107:29 he reduced the storm to a calm, and all the waters subsided, 

Psa 107:30 and he brought them, overjoyed at the stillness, to the port where they were bound. 

Psa 107:31 Let them thank Yahweh for his faithful love, for his wonders for the children of Adam! 

Psa 107:32 Let them extol him in the assembly of the people, and praise him in the council of elders. 

Psa 107:33 He has turned rivers into desert, bubbling springs into arid ground, 

Psa 107:34 fertile country into salt-flats, because the people living there were evil. 

Psa 107:35 But he has turned desert into stretches of water, arid ground into bubbling springs, 

Psa 107:36 and has given the hungry a home, where they have built themselves a city. 

Psa 107:37 There they sow fields and plant vines, and reap a harvest of their produce. 

Psa 107:38 He blesses them and their numbers increase, he keeps their cattle at full strength. 

Psa 107:39 Their numbers had fallen, they had grown weak, under pressure of disaster and hardship; 

Psa 107:40 he covered princes in contempt, left them to wander in trackless wastes. 

Psa 107:41 But the needy he raises from their misery, makes their families as numerous as sheep. 

Psa 107:42 At the sight the honest rejoice, and the wicked have nothing to say. 

Psa 107:43 Who is wise? Such a one should take this to heart, and come to understand Yahweh’s faithful love. 
Psa 108:1 [Song Psalm Of David] My heart is ready, God, I will sing and make music; come, my glory! 

Psa 108:2 Awake, lyre and harp, I will awake the Dawn! 

Psa 108:3 I will praise you among the peoples, Yahweh, I will play to you among nations, 

Psa 108:4 for your faithful love towers to heaven, and your constancy to the clouds. 

Psa 1 08:5 Be exalted above the heavens, God. Your glory over the whole earth! 

Psa 108:6 To rescue those you love, save with your right hand and answer us. 

Psa 108:7 God has spoken from his sanctuary, “In triumph I will divide up Shechem, and share out the Valley of 



Succoth. 

Psa 108:8 “Mine is Gilead, mine Manasseh, Ephraim the helmet on my head, Judah my commander’s baton, 

Psa 108:9 “Moab a bowl for me to wash in, on Edom I plant my sandal, over Philistia I cry victory”. 

Psa 108:10 Who will lead me against a fortified city, who will guide me into Edom, 

Psa 108:1 1 if not you, the God who has rejected us? God, you no longer march with our armies. 

Psa 108:12 Bring us help in our time of crisis, any human assistance is worthless. 

Psa 108:13 With God we shall do deeds of valour, he will trample down our enemies. 

Psa 109:1 [For the choirmaster Of David Psalm] God whom I praise, do not be silent! 

Psa 109:2 Wicked and deceiving words are being said about me, false accusations are cast in my teeth. 

Psa 109:3 Words of hate fly all around me, though I give no cause for hostility. 

Psa 109:4 In return for my friendship they denounce me, and all I can do is pray! 

Psa 109:5 They repay my kindness with evil, and friendship with hatred. 

Psa 109:6 “Set up a wicked man against him as accuser to stand on his right. 

Psa 109:7 At his trial may he emerge as guilty, even his prayer construed as a crime! 

Psa 109:8 “May his life be cut short, someöne else take over his office, 

Psa 109:9 his children be orphaned, his wife be widowed. 

Psa 109:10 “May his children wander perpetually, beggars, driven from the ruins of their house, 

Psa 109:11 a creditor seize all his goods, and strangers make off with his earnings. 

Psa 109:12 “May there be none left faithful enough to show him love, no one take pity on his orphans, 

Psa 109:13 the line of his descendants cut off, his name wiped out in one generation. 

Psa 109:14 “May Yahweh never forget the crimes of his ancestors, and his mother’s sins not be wiped out; 

Psa 109:15 may Yahweh keep these constantly in mind, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth”. 

Psa 109:16 He had no thought of being loyal, but hounded the poor and the needy and the broken-hearted to 
their death. 

Psa 109:17 He had a taste for cursing; let it recoil on him! No taste for blessing; let it never come his way! 

Psa 109:18 Cursing has been the uniform he wore; let it soak into him like water, like oil right into his bones. 

Psa 109:19 Let it be as a robe which envelops him completely, a sash which he always wears. 

Psa 109:20 Let this be the salary Yahweh pays the accusers who blacken my name. 

Psa 109:21 Yahweh, treat them as your name demands; as your faithful love is generous, deliver me. 

Psa 109:22 Poor and needy as I am, my wounds go right to the heart; 

Psa 109:23 I am passing away like a fading shadow, they have shaken me off like a locust. 

Psa 109:24 My knees are weak from lack of food, my body lean for lack of fat. 

Psa 1 09:25 I have become the butt of their taunts, they shake their heads at the sight of me. 

Psa 109:26 Help me, Yahweh my God, save me as your faithful love demands. 

Psa 109:27 Let them know that yours is the saving hand, that this, Yahweh, is your work. 

Psa 1 09:28 Let them curse, provided that you bless; let their attacks bring shame to them and joy to your 
servant! 

Psa 109:29 Let my accusers be clothed in disgrace, enveloped in a cloak of shame. 

Psa 109:30 With generous thanks to Yahweh on my lips, I shall praise him before all the people, 

Psa 1 09:31 for he stands at the side of the poor, to save their lives from those who sit in judgement on them. 

Psa 1 10:1 [Of David Psalm] Yahweh declared to my Lord, “Take your seat at my right hand, till I have made 
your enemies your footstool”. 

Psa 1 1 0:2 Yahweh will stretch out the sceptre of your power; from Zion you will rule your foes all around you. 
Psa 1 1 0:3 Royal dignity has been yours from the day of your birth, sacred honour from the womb, from the 
dawn of your youth. 

Psa 1 1 0:4 Yahweh has sworn an oath he will never retract, you are a priest for ever of the order of Melchizedek. 
Psa 1 1 0:5 At your right hand, Lord, he shatters kings when his anger breaks out. 

Psa 1 1 0:6 He judges nations, heaping up corpses, he breaks heads over the whole wide world. 

Psa 110:7 He drinks from a stream as he goes, and therefore he holds his head high. 

Psa 111:1 Alleluia! I give thanks to Yahweh with all my heart, in the meeting-place of honest people, in the 
assembly. 

Psa 111:2 Great are the deeds of Yahweh, to be pondered by all who delight in them. 

Psa 111:3 Full of splendour and majesty his work, his saving justice stands firm for ever. 

Psa 111:4 He gives us a memorial of his great deeds; Yahweh is mercy and tenderness. 

Psa 111:5 He gives food to those who fear him, he keeps his covenant ever in mind. 

Psa 111:6 His works show his people his power in giving them the birthright of the nations. 

Psa 111:7 The works of his hands are fidelity and justice, all his precepts are trustworthy, 

Psa 111:8 established for ever and ever, accomplished in fidelity and honesty. 

Psa 111:9 Deliverance he sends to his people, his covenant he imposes for ever; holy and awesome his name. 



Psa 111:10 The root of wisdom is fear of Yahweh; those who attain it are wise. His praise will continue for ever. 
Psa 1 12:1 Alleluia! How blessed is anyone who fears Yahweh, who delights in his commandments! 

Psa 1 12:2 His descendants shall be powerful on earth, the race of the honest shall receive blessings: 

Psa 1 12:3 Riches and wealth for his family; his uprightness stands firm for ever. 

Psa 1 12:4 For the honest he shines as a lamp in the dark, generous, tender-hearted, and upright. 

Psa 1 12:5 All goes well for one who lends generously, who is honest in all his dealing; 

Psa 1 12:6 for all time to come he will not stumble, for all time to come the upright will be remembered. 

Psa 1 12:7 Bad news holds no fears for him, firm is his heart, trusting in Yahweh. 

Psa 1 12:8 His heart held steady, he has no fears, till he can gloat over his enemies. 

Psa 1 12:9 To the needy he gives without stint, his uprightness stands firm for ever; his reputation is founded on 
strength. 

Psa 1 12:10 The wicked are vexed at the sight, they grind their teeth and waste away. The desires of the wicked 
will be frustrated. 

Psa 113:1 Alleluia! Praise, servants of Yahweh, praise the name of Yahweh. 

Psa 1 1 3:2 Blessed be the name of Yahweh, henceforth and for ever. 

Psa 113:3 From the rising of the sun to its setting, praised be the name of Yahweh! 

Psa 1 1 3:4 Supreme over all nations is Yahweh, supreme over the heavens his glory. 

Psa 1 1 3:5 Who is like Yahweh our God? His throne is set on high, 

Psa 113:6 but he stoops to look down on heaven and earth. 

Psa 1 1 3:7 He raises the poor from the dust, he lifts the needy from the dunghill, 

Psa 1 1 3:8 to give them a place among princes, among princes of his people. 

Psa 1 1 3:9 He lets the barren woman be seated at home, the happy mother of sons. 

Psa 114:1 Alleluia! When Israel came out of Egypt, the House of Jacob from a people of foreign speech, 

Psa 114:2 Judah became his sanctuary, and Israel his domain. 

Psa 1 14:3 The sea fled at the sight, the Jordan turned back, 

Psa 114:4 the mountains skipped like rams, the hills like sheep. 

Psa 1 14:5 Sea, what makes you flee? Jordan, why turn back? 

Psa 114:6 Why skip like rams, you mountains? Why like sheep, you hills? 

Psa 1 14:7 Tremble, earth, at the coming of the Lord, at the coming of the God of Jacob, 

Psa 1 14:8 who turns rock into pool, flint into fountain. 

Psa 1 15:1 Not to us, Yahweh, not to us, but to your name give the glory, for your faithful love and your 
constancy! 

Psa 115:2 Why should the nations ask, “Where is their God?”. 

Psa 1 1 5:3 Our God is in heaven, he creates whatever he chooses. 

Psa 1 1 5:4 They have idols of silver and gold, made by human hands. 

Psa 1 1 5:5 These have mouths but say nothing, have eyes but see nothing, 

Psa 1 1 5:6 have ears but hear nothing, have noses but smell nothing. 

Psa 1 15:7 They have hands but cannot feel, have feet but cannot walk, no sound comes from their throats. 

Psa 1 1 5:8 Their makers will end up like them, and all who rely on them. 

Psa 1 1 5:9 House of Israel, rely on Yahweh; he is their help and their shield. 

Psa 115:10 House of Aaron, rely on Yahweh; he is their help and their shield. 

Psa 1 15:1 1 You who fear Yahweh, rely on Yahweh; he is their help and their shield. 

Psa 1 15:12 Yahweh will keep us in mind, he will bless, he will bless the House of Israel, he will bless the House 
of Aaron, 

Psa 1 15:13 he will bless those who fear Yahweh, small and great alike. 

Psa 1 15:14 May Yahweh add to your numbers, yours and your children’s too! 

Psa 115:15 May you be blessed by Yahweh, who made heaven and earth. 

Psa 1 15:16 Heaven belongs to Yahweh, but earth he has given to the children of Adam. 

Psa 1 15:17 The dead cannot praise Yahweh, those who sink into silence, 

Psa 1 15:18 but we, the living, shall bless Yahweh, henceforth and for ever. 

Psa 1 16:1 Alleluia! I am filled with love when Yahweh listens to the sound of my prayer, 

Psa 1 16:2 when he bends down to hear me, as I call. 

Psa 1 16:3 The bonds of death were all round me, the snares of Sheol held me fast; distress and anguish held 
me in their grip, 

Psa 1 16:4 I called on the name of Yahweh. Deliver me, Yahweh, I beg you. 

Psa 116:5 Yahweh is merciful and upright, our God is tenderness. 

Psa 1 16:6 Yahweh looks after the simple, when I was brought low he gave me strength. 

Psa 1 16:7 My heart, be at peace once again, for Yahweh has treated you generously. 

Psa 1 16:8 He has rescued me from death, my eyes from tears, and my feet from stumbling. 



Psa 116:9 I shall pass my life in the presence of Yahweh, in the land of the living. 

Psa 1 16:10 My trust does not fail even when I say, “I am completely wretched”. 

Psa 1 16:1 1 In my terror I said, “No human being can be relied on”. 

Psa 1 16:12 What return can I make to Yahweh for his generosity to me? 

Psa 116:13 I shall take up the cup of salvation and call on the name of Yahweh. 

Psa 1 16:14 I shall fulfil my vows to Yahweh, witnessed by all his people. 

Psa 1 16:15 Costly in Yahweh’s sight is the death of his faithful. 

Psa 1 16:16 I beg you, Yahweh! I am your servant, I am your servant and my mother was your servant; you have 
undone my fetters. 

Psa 116:17 I shall offer you a sacrifice of thanksgiving and call on the name of Yahweh. 

Psa 116:18 I shall fulfil my vows to Yahweh, witnessed by all his people, 

Psa 1 16:19 in the courts of the house of Yahweh, in your very heart, Jerusalem. 

Psa 117:1 Alleluia! Praise Yahweh, all nations, extol him, all peoples, 

Psa 117:2 for his faithful love is strong and his constancy never-ending. 

Psa 1 18:1 Alleluia! Give thanks to Yahweh for he is good, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 1 1 8:2 Let the House of Israel say, “His faithful love endures for ever”. 

Psa 1 1 8:3 Let the House of Aaron say, “His faithful love endures for ever”. 

Psa 1 1 8:4 Let those who fear Yahweh say, “His faithful love endures for ever”. 

Psa 118:5 In my distress I called to Yahweh, he heard me and brought me relief. 

Psa 118:6 With Yahweh on my side I fear nothing; what can human beings do to me? 

Psa 1 1 8:7 With Yahweh on my side as my help, I gloat over my enemies. 

Psa 1 1 8:8 It is better to take refuge in Yahweh than to rely on human beings; 

Psa 1 18:9 better to take refuge in Yahweh than to rely on princes. 

Psa 1 18:10 Nations were swarming around me, in the name of Yahweh I cut them down; 

Psa 1 18:1 1 they swarmed around me, pressing upon me, in the name of Yahweh I cut them down. 

Psa 1 18:12 They swarmed around me like bees, they flared up like a brushwood fire, in the name of Yahweh I 
cut them down. 

Psa 1 18:13 I was pushed hard, to make me fall, but Yahweh came to my help. 

Psa 1 18:14 Yahweh is my strength and my song, he has been my Saviour. 

Psa 118:15 Shouts of joy and salvation, in the tents of the upright, “Yahweh’s right hand is triumphant, 

Psa 118:16 Yahweh’s right hand is victorious, Yahweh’s right hand is triumphant!”. 

Psa 1 18:17 I shall not die, I shall live to recount the great deeds of Yahweh. 

Psa 1 18:18 Though Yahweh punished me sternly, he has not abandoned me to death. 

Psa 1 18:19 Open for me the gates of saving justice, I shall go in and thank Yahweh. 

Psa 1 1 8:20 This is the gate of Yahweh, where the upright go in. 

Psa 1 1 8:21 I thank you for hearing me, and making yourself my Saviour. 

Psa 1 18:22 The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone; 

Psa 1 1 8:23 This is Yahweh’s doing, and we marvel at it. 

Psa 1 1 8:24 This is the day which Yahweh has made, a day for us to rejoice and be glad. 

Psa 118:25 We beg you, Yahweh, save us, we beg you, Yahweh, give us victory! 

Psa 1 1 8:26 Blessed in the name of Yahweh is he who is coming! We bless you from the house of Yahweh. 

Psa 118:27 Yahweh is God, he gives us light. Link your processions, branches in hand, up to the horns of the 
altar. 

Psa 1 1 8:28 You are my God, I thank you, all praise to you, my God. I thank you for hearing me, and making 
yourself my Saviour. 

Psa 1 1 8:29 Give thanks to Yahweh for he is good, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 119:1 How blessed are those whose way is blameless, who walk in the Law of Yahweh! 

Psa 119:2 Blessed are those who observe his instructions, who seek him with all their hearts, 

Psa 1 1 9:3 and, doing no evil, who walk in his ways. 

Psa 1 19:4 You lay down your precepts to be carefully kept. 

Psa 1 1 9:5 May my ways be steady in doing your will. 

Psa 119:6 Then I shall not be shamed, if my gaze is fixed on your commandments. 

Psa 119:7 I thank you with a sincere heart for teaching me your upright judgements. 

Psa 119:8 I shall do your will; do not ever abandon me wholly. 

Psa 1 1 9:9 How can a young man keep his way spotless? By keeping your words. 

Psa 1 19:10 With all my heart I seek you, do not let me stray from your commandments. 

Psa 1 19:1 1 In my heart I treasure your promises, to avoid sinning against you. 

Psa 1 19:12 Blessed are you, Yahweh, teach me your will! 

Psa 1 19:13 With my lips I have repeated all the judgements you have given. 



Psa 119:14 
Psa 119:15 
Psa 119:16 
Psa 119:17 
Psa 119:18 
Psa 119:19 
Psa 119:20 
Psa 119:21 
Psa 119:22 
Psa 119:23 
Psa 119:24 
Psa 119:25 
Psa 119:26 
Psa 119:27 
Psa 119:28 
Psa 119:29 
Psa 119:30 
Psa 119:31 
Psa 119:32 
Psa 119:33 
Psa 119:34 
Psa 119:35 
Psa 119:36 
Psa 119:37 
Psa 119:38 
Psa 119:39 
Psa 119:40 
Psa 119:41 
Psa 119:42 
Psa 119:43 
Psa 119:44 
Psa 119:45 
Psa 119:46 
Psa 119:47 
Psa 119:48 
Psa 119:49 
Psa 119:50 
Psa 119:51 
Psa 119:52 
Psa 119:53 
Psa 119:54 
Psa 119:55 
Psa 119:56 
Psa 119:57 
Psa 119:58 
Psa 119:59 
Psa 119:60 
Psa 119:61 
Psa 119:62 
Psa 119:63 
Psa 119:64 
Psa 119:65 
Psa 119:66 
Psa 119:67 
Psa 119:68 
Psa 119:69 
Psa 119:70 
Psa 119:71 
Psa 119:72 


In the way of your instructions lies my joy, a joy beyond all wealth. 

I will ponder your precepts and fix my gaze on your paths. 

I find my delight in your will, I do not forget your words. 

Be generous to your servant and I shall live, and shall keep your words. 

Open my eyes and I shall fix my gaze on the wonders of your Law. 

Wayfarer though I am on the earth, do not hide your commandments from me. 

My heart is pining away with longing at all times for your judgements. 

You have rebuked the arrogant, the accursed, who stray from your commandments. 

Set me free from taunts and contempt since I observe your instructions. 

Though princes sit plotting against me, your servant keeps pondering your will. 

Your instructions are my delight, your wishes my counsellors. 

Down in the dust I lie prostrate; true to your word, revive me. 

I tell you my ways and you answer me; teach me your wishes. 

Show me the way of your precepts, that I may reflect on your wonders. 

I am melting away for grief; true to your word, raise me up. 

Keep me far from the way of deceit, grant me the grace of your Law. 

I have chosen the way of constancy, I have moulded myself to your judgements. 

I cling to your instructions, Yahweh, do not disappoint me. 

I run the way of your commandments, for you have given me freedom of heart. 

Teach me, Yahweh, the way of your will, and I will observe it. 

Give me understanding and I will observe your Law, and keep it wholeheartedly. 

Guide me in the way of your commandments, for my delight is there. 

Bend my heart to your instructions, not to selfish gain. 

Avert my eyes from pointless images, by your word give me life. 

Keep your promise to your servant so that all may hold you in awe. 

Avert the taunts that I dread, for your judgements are generous. 

See how I yearn for your precepts; in your saving justice give me life. 

Let your faithful love come to me, Yahweh, true to your promise, save me! 

Give me an answer to the taunts against me, since I rely on your word. 

Do not deprive me of that faithful word, since my hope lies in your judgements. 

I shall keep your Law without fail for ever and ever. 

I shall live in all freedom because I have sought your precepts. 

I shall speak of your instructions before kings and will not be shamed. 

Your commandments fill me with delight, I love them dearly. 

I stretch out my hands to your commandments that I love, and I ponder your judgements. 
Keep in mind your promise to your servant on which I have built my hope. 

It is my comfort in distress, that your promise gives me life. 

Endlessly the arrogant have jeered at me, but I have not swerved from your Law. 

I have kept your age — old judgements in mind, Yahweh, and I am comforted. 

Fury grips me when I see the wicked who abandon your Law. 

Your judgements are my song where I live in exile. 

All night, Yahweh, I hold your name in mind, I keep your Law. 

This is what it means to me, observing your precepts. 

My task, I have said, Yahweh, is to keep your word. 

Wholeheartedly I entreat your favour; true to your promise, take pity on me! 

I have reflected on my ways, and I turn my steps to your instructions. 

I hurry without delay to keep your commandments. 

Though caught in the snares of the wicked, I do not forget your Law. 

At midnight I rise to praise you for your upright judgements. 

I am a friend to all who fear you and keep your precepts. 

Your faithful love fills the earth, Yahweh, teach me your judgements. 

You have been generous to your servant, Yahweh, true to your promise. 

Teach me judgement and knowledge, for I rely on your commandments. 

Before I was punished I used to go astray, but now I keep to your promise. 

You are generous and act generously, teach me your will. 

The arrogant blacken me with lies though I wholeheartedly observe your precepts. 

Their hearts are gross like rich fat, but my delight is in your Law. 

It was good for me that I had to suffer, the better to learn your judgements. 

The Law you have uttered is more precious to me than all the wealth in the world. 



Psa 1 1 9:73 Your hands have made me and held me firm, give me understanding and I shall learn your 
commandments. 

Psa 1 1 9:74 Those who fear you rejoice at the sight of me since I put my hope in your word. 

Psa 1 1 9:75 I know, Yahweh, that your judgements are upright, and in punishing me you show your constancy. 
Psa 1 1 9:76 Your faithful love must be my consolation, as you have promised your servant. 

Psa 1 1 9:77 T reat me with tenderness and I shall live, for your Law is my delight. 

Psa 1 1 9:78 Let the arrogant who tell lies against me be shamed, while I ponder your precepts. 

Psa 1 1 9:79 Let those who fear you rally to me, those who understand your instructions. 

Psa 1 1 9:80 My heart shall be faultless towards your will; then I shall not be ashamed. 

Psa 1 1 9:81 I shall wear myself out for your salvation, for your word is my hope. 

Psa 1 1 9:82 My eyes, too, are worn out waiting for your promise, when will you have pity on me? 

Psa 1 1 9:83 For I am like a smoked wineskin, but I do not forget your will. 

Psa 1 1 9:84 How long has your servant to live? When will you bring my persecutors to judgement? 

Psa 1 1 9:85 The arrogant have dug pitfalls for me in defiance of your Law. 

Psa 119:86 All your commandments show constancy. Help me when they pursue me dishonestly. 

Psa 1 1 9:87 They have almost annihilated me on earth, but I have not deserted your precepts. 

Psa 119:88 True to your faithful love, give me life, and I shall keep the instructions you have laid down. 

Psa 119:89 Forever, Yahweh, your word is planted firm in heaven. 

Psa 1 1 9:90 Your constancy endures from age to age; you established the earth and it stands firm. 

Psa 1 1 9:91 Through your judgements all stands firm to this day, for all creation is your servant. 

Psa 119:92 Had your Law not been my delight, I would have perished in my misery. 

Psa 1 1 9:93 I shall never forget your precepts, for by them you have given me life. 

Psa 1 1 9:94 I am yours, save me, for I seek your precepts. 

Psa 1 1 9:95 The wicked may hope to destroy me, but all my thought is of your instructions. 

Psa 1 1 9:96 I have seen that all perfection is finite, but your commandment has no limit. 

Psa 1 1 9:97 How I love your Law! I ponder it all day long. 

Psa 1 1 9:98 You make me wiser than my enemies by your commandment which is mine for ever. 

Psa 1 1 9:99 I am wiser than all my teachers because I ponder your instructions. 

Psa 119:100 I have more understanding than the aged because I keep your precepts. 

Psa 1 19:101 I restrain my foot from evil paths to keep your word. 

Psa 1 19:102 Ido not turn aside from your judgements, because you yourself have instructed me. 

Psa 119:103 How pleasant your promise to my palate, sweeter than honey in my mouth! 

Psa 119:104 From your precepts I learn wisdom, so I hate all deceptive ways. 

Psa 1 19:105 Your word is a lamp for my feet, a light on my path. 

Psa 1 19:106 I have sworn — and shall maintain it — to keep your upright judgements. 

Psa 1 19:107 I am utterly wretched, Yahweh; true to your promise, give me life. 

Psa 119:108 Accept, Yahweh, the tribute from my mouth, and teach me your judgements. 

Psa 1 19:109 My life is in your hands perpetually, I do not forget your Law. 

Psa 1 19:1 10 The wicked have laid out a snare for me, but I have not strayed from your precepts. 

Psa 1 19:1 1 1 Your instructions are my eternal heritage, they are the joy of my heart. 

Psa 1 19:1 12 I devote myself to obeying your statutes, their recompense is eternal. 

Psa 1 19:1 13 I hate a divided heart, I love your Law. 

Psa 1 19:1 14 You are my refuge and shield, I put my hope in your word. 

Psa 1 19:1 15 Leave me alone, you wicked, I shall observe the commandments of my God. 

Psa 1 19:1 16 True to your word, support me and I shall live; do not disappoint me of my hope. 

Psa 1 19:1 17 Uphold me and I shall be saved, my gaze fixed on your will. 

Psa 1 19:1 18 You shake off all who stray from your will; deceit fills their horizon. 

Psa 1 19:1 19 In your sight all the wicked of the earth are like rust, so I love your instructions. 

Psa 1 19:120 My whole body trembles before you, your judgements fill me with fear. 

Psa 1 19:121 All my conduct has been just and upright, do not hand me over to my oppressors. 

Psa 1 19:122 Guarantee the well-being of your servant, do not let the proud oppress me. 

Psa 1 19:123 My eyes are languishing for your salvation and for the saving justice you have promised. 

Psa 1 19:124 Show your faithful love to your servant, teach me your judgements. 

Psa 1 19:125 Your servant am I; give me understanding and I shall know your instructions. 

Psa 1 19:126 It is time to take action, Yahweh, your Law is being broken. 

Psa 1 19:127 So I love your commandments more than gold, purest gold. 

Psa 119:128 Sol rule my life by your precepts, I hate all deceptive paths. 

Psa 119:129 Wonderful are your instructions, so I observe them. 

Psa 1 19:130 As your word unfolds it gives light, and even the simple understand. 



Psa 1 19:131 I open wide my mouth, panting eagerly for your commandments. 

Psa 1 19:132 Turn to me, pity me; those who love your name deserve it. 

Psa 1 19:133 Keep my steps firm in your promise; that no evil may triumph over me. 

Psa 119:134 Rescue me from human oppression, and I will observe your precepts. 

Psa 1 19:135 Let your face shine on your servant, teach me your will. 

Psa 119:136 My eyes stream with tears because your Law is disregarded. 

Psa 119:137 You are upright, Yahweh, and your judgements are honest. 

Psa 119:138 You impose uprightness as a witness to yourself, it is constancy itself. 

Psa 1 19:139 My zeal is burning me up because my oppressors forget your word. 

Psa 1 19:140 Your promise is well tested, your servant holds it dear. 

Psa 1 19:141 Puny and despised as I am, I do not forget your precepts. 

Psa 1 19:142 Your saving justice is for ever just, and your Law is trustworthy. 

Psa 1 19:143 Though anguish and distress grip me your commandments are my delight. 

Psa 119:144 Your instructions are upright for ever, give me understanding and I shall live. 

Psa 1 19:145 I call with all my heart; answer me, Yahweh, and I will observe your judgements. 

Psa 1 19:146 I call to you; save me, and I will keep your instructions. 

Psa 1 19:147 I am awake before dawn to cry for help, I put my hope in your word. 

Psa 1 19:148 My eyes are awake before each watch of the night, to ponder your promise. 

Psa 1 19:149 In your faithful love, Yahweh, listen to my voice, let your judgements give me life. 

Psa 119:150 My pursuers are coming closer to their wicked designs, and further from your Law. 

Psa 1 19:151 You are close to me, Yahweh, and all your commandments are true. 

Psa 1 19:152 Long have I known that your instructions were laid down to last for ever. 

Psa 1 19:153 Look at my suffering and rescue me, for I do not forget your Law. 

Psa 119:154 Plead my cause and defend me; as you promised, give me life. 

Psa 1 19:155 Salvation is far from the wicked, for they do not seek your will. 

Psa 1 19:156 Your kindnesses to me are countless, Yahweh; true to your judgements, give me life. 

Psa 119:157 Though my enemies and oppressors are countless, I do not turn aside from your instructions. 
Psa 119:158 The sight of these renegades appals me; they do not observe your promise. 

Psa 119:159 See how I love your precepts; true to your faithful love, give me life. 

Psa 1 19:160 Faithfulness is the essence of your word, your upright judgements hold good for ever. 

Psa 1 19:161 Though princes hound me unprovoked, what fills me with awe is your word. 

Psa 1 19:162 I rejoice in your promise like one who finds a vast treasure. 

Psa 1 19:163 Falsehood I hate and detest, my love is for your Law. 

Psa 1 19:164 Seven times a day I praise you for your upright judgements. 

Psa 1 19:165 Great peace for those who love your Law; no stumbling-blocks for them! 

Psa 1 19:166 I am waiting for your salvation, Yahweh, I fulfil your commandments. 

Psa 119:167 I observe your instructions, I love them dearly. 

Psa 1 19:168 I observe your precepts, your judgements, for all my ways are before you. 

Psa 119:169 May my cry approach your presence, Yahweh; by your word give me understanding. 

Psa 1 19:170 May my prayer come into your presence, rescue me as you have promised. 

Psa 1 19:171 May my lips proclaim your praise, for you teach me your will. 

Psa 1 19:172 May my tongue recite your promise, for all your commandments are upright. 

Psa 119:173 May your hand be there to help me, since I have chosen your precepts. 

Psa 1 19:174 I long for your salvation, Yahweh, your Law is my delight. 

Psa 1 19:175 May I live only to praise you, may your judgements be my help. 

Psa 1 19:176 I am wandering like a lost sheep, come and look for your servant, for I have not forgotten your 
commandments. 

Psa 120:1 [Song of Ascents *{* The Songs of Ascents (Pss 120-134) were sung by pilgrims on their way up to 
Jerusalem.} ] To Yahweh when I am in trouble I call and he answers me. 

Psa 120:2 Yahweh, save me from lying lips and a treacherous tongue! 

Psa 120:3 What will he repay you, what more, treacherous tongue? 

Psa 120:4 War-arrows made sharp over red-hot charcoal. 

Psa 120:5 How wretched I am, living in Meshech, dwelling in the tents of Kedar! 

Psa 120:6 Too long have I lived among people who hate peace. 

Psa 120:7 When I speak of peace they are all for war! 

Psa 121:1 [Song of Ascents] I lift up my eyes to the mountains; where is my help to come from? 

Psa 121 :2 My help comes from Yahweh who made heaven and earth. 

Psa 121 :3 May he save your foot from stumbling; may he, your guardian, not fall asleep! 

Psa 121 :4 You see — he neither sleeps nor slumbers, the guardian of Israel. 



Psa 121 :5 Yahweh is your guardian, your shade, Yahweh, at your right hand. 

Psa 121 :6 By day the sun will not strike you, nor the moon by night. 

Psa 121 :7 Yahweh guards you from all harm Yahweh guards your life, 

Psa 121 :8 Yahweh guards your comings and goings, henceforth and for ever. 

Psa 122:1 [Song of Ascents Of David] I rejoiced that they said to me, “Let us go to the house of Yahweh”. 

Psa 122:2 At last our feet are standing at your gates, Jerusalem! 

Psa 122:3 Jerusalem, built as a city, in one united whole, 

Psa 122:4 there the tribes go up, the tribes of Yahweh, a sign for Israel to give thanks to the name of Yahweh. 
Psa 122:5 For there are set the thrones of judgement, the thrones of the house of David. 

Psa 122:6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, prosperity for your homes! 

Psa 122:7 Peace within your walls, prosperity in your palaces! 

Psa 122:8 For love of my brothers and my friends I will say, “Peace upon you!”. 

Psa 122:9 For love of the house of Yahweh our God I will pray for your well-being. 

Psa 123:1 [Song of Ascents] I lift up my eyes to you who are enthroned in heaven. 

Psa 123:2 Just as the eyes of slaves are on their masters’ hand, or the eyes of a slave-girl on the hand of her 
mistress, so our eyes are on Yahweh our God, for him to take pity on us. 

Psa 123:3 Have pity on us, Yahweh, have pity, for we have had our full share of scorn, 

Psa 123:4 more than our share of jeers from the complacent. (Scorn is for the proud.) 

Psa 124:1 [Song of Ascents Of David] If Yahweh had not been on our side - let Israel repeat it- 
Psa 124:2 if Yahweh had not been on our side when people attacked us, 

Psa 1 24:3 they would have swallowed us alive in the heat of their anger. 

Psa 124:4 Then water was washing us away, a torrent running right over us; 

Psa 124:5 running right over us then were turbulent waters. 

Psa 124:6 Blessed be Yahweh for not letting us fall a prey to their teeth! 

Psa 124:7 We escaped like a bird from the fowlers’ net. The net was broken and we escaped; 

Psa 124:8 our help is in the name of Yahweh, who made heaven and earth. 

Psa 125:1 [Song of Ascents] Whoëver trusts in Yahweh is like Mount Zion: unshakeable, it stands for ever. 

Psa 125:2 Jerusalem! The mountains encircle her: so Yahweh encircles his people, henceforth and for ever. 

Psa 1 25:3 The sceptre of the wicked will not come to rest over the heritage of the upright; or the upright might 
set their own hands to evil. 

Psa 125:4 Do good, Yahweh, to those who are good, to the sincere at heart. 

Psa 125:5 But the crooked, the twisted, turn them away, Yahweh, with evil-doers. Peace to Israel! 

Psa 126:1 [Song of Ascents] When Yahweh brought back Zion’s captives we lived in a dream; 

Psa 126:2 then our mouths filled with laughter, and our lips with song. Then the nations kept saying, “What great 
deeds Yahweh has done for them!”. 

Psa 126:3 Yes, Yahweh did great deeds for us, and we were overjoyed. 

Psa 126:4 Bring back, Yahweh, our people from captivity like torrents in the Negeb! 

Psa 126:5 Those who sow in tears sing as they reap. 

Psa 126:6 He went off, went off weeping, carrying the seed. He comes back, comes back singing, bringing in 
his sheaves. 

Psa 127:1 [Song of Ascents Of Solomon] If Yahweh does not build a house in vain do its builders toil. If Yahweh 
does not guard a city in vain does its guard keep watch. 

Psa 127:2 In vain you get up earlier, and put off going to bed, sweating to make a living, since it is he who 
provides for his beloved as they sleep. 

Psa 127:3 Sons are a birthright from Yahweh, children are a reward from him. 

Psa 127:4 Like arrows in a warrior’s hand are the sons you father when young. 

Psa 127:5 How blessed is the man who has filled his quiver with them; in dispute with his enemies at the city 
gate he will not be worsted. 

Psa 128:1 [Song of Ascents] How blessed are all who fear Yahweh, who walk in his ways! 

Psa 128:2 Your own labours will yield you a living, happy and prosperous will you be. 

Psa 128:3 Your wife a fruitful vine in the inner places of your house. Your children round your table like shoots 
of an olive tree. 

Psa 128:4 Such are the blessings that fall on those who fear Yahweh. 

Psa 128:5 May Yahweh bless you from Zion! May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life, 

Psa 128:6 and live to see your children’s children! Peace to Israel! 

Psa 129:1 [Song of Ascents] Often as men have attacked me since I was young — let Israel repeat it- 
Psa 129:2 often as men have attacked me since I was young, they have never overcome me. 

Psa 129:3 On my back ploughmen have set to work, making long furrows, 

Psa 129:4 but Yahweh the upright has shattered the yoke of the wicked. 



Psa 129:5 Let all who hate Zion be thrown back in confusion, 

Psa 129:6 let them be like grass on a roof, dried up before it is cut, 

Psa 129:7 never to fill the reaper’s arm nor the binder’s lap. 

Psa 129:8 And no passer-by will say, “The blessing of Yahweh be on you! “We bless you in the name of 
Yahweh”. 

Psa 130:1 [Song of Ascents] From the depths I call to you, Yahweh: 

Psa 130:2 Lord, hear my cry. Listen attentively to the sound of my pleading! 

Psa 130:3 If you kept a record of our sins, Lord, who could stand their ground? 

Psa 130:4 But with you is forgiveness, that you may be revered. 

Psa 130:5 I rely, my whole being relies, Yahweh, on your promise. 

Psa 130:6 My whole being hopes in the Lord, more than watchmen for daybreak; more than watchmen for 
daybreak 

Psa 130:7 let Israel hope in Yahweh. For with Yahweh is faithful love, with him generous ransom; 

Psa 130:8 and he will ransom Israel from all its sins. 

Psa 131:1 [Song of Ascents] Yahweh, my heart is not haughty, I do not set my sights too high. I have taken no 
part in great affairs, in wonders beyond my scope. 

Psa 131:2 No, I hold myself in quiet and silence, like a little child in its mother’s arms, like a little child, so I keep 
myself. 

Psa 1 31 :3 Let Israel hope in Yahweh henceforth and for ever. 

Psa 132:1 [Song of Ascents] Yahweh, remember David and all the hardships he endured, 

Psa 1 32:2 the oath he swore to Yahweh, his vow to the Mighty One of Jacob: 

Psa 132:3 “I will not enter tent or house, will not climb into bed, 

Psa 132:4 will not allow myself to sleep, not even to close my eyes, 

Psa 1 32:5 till I have found a place for Yahweh, a dwelling for the Mighty One of Jacob!”. 

Psa 132:6 Listen, we heard of it in Ephrathah, we found it at Forest-Fields. 

Psa 132:7 Let us go into his dwelling-place, and worship at his footstool. 

Psa 1 32:8 Go up, Yahweh, to your resting-place, you and the ark of your strength. 

Psa 1 32:9 Your priests are robed in saving justice, your faithful are shouting for joy. 

Psa 132:10 For the sake of your servant David, do not reject your anointed. 

Psa 132:11 Yahweh has sworn to David, and will always remain true to his word, “I promise that I will set a son 
of yours upon your throne. 

Psa 132:12 If your sons observe my covenant and the instructions I have taught them, their sons too for 
evermore will occupy your throne”. 

Psa 132:13 For Yahweh has chosen Zion, he has desired it as a home. 

Psa 132:14 “Here shall I rest for evermore, here shall I make my home as I have wished. 

Psa 132:15 “I shall generously bless her produce, give her needy their fill of food, 

Psa 132:16 I shall clothe her priests with salvation, and her faithful will sing aloud for joy. 

Psa 132:17 “There I shall raise up a line of descendants for David, light a lamp for my anointed; 

Psa 132:18 I shall clothe his enemies with shame, while his own crown shall flourish”. 

Psa 133:1 [Song of Ascents] How good, how delightful it is to live as brothers all together! 

Psa 133:2 It is like a fine oil on the head, running down the beard, running down Aaron’s beard, onto the collar 
of his robes. 

Psa 133:3 It is like the dew of Hermon falling on the heights of Zion; for there Yahweh bestows his blessing, 
everlasting life. 

Psa 134:1 [Song of Ascents] Come, bless Yahweh, all you who serve Yahweh, serving in the house of Yahweh, 

in the courts of the house of our God. Through the night watches 

Psa 134:2 stretch out your hands towards the sanctuary and bless Yahweh. 

Psa 134:3 May Yahweh bless you from Zion, he who made heaven and earth! 

Psa 135:1 Alleluia! Praise the name of Yahweh, you who serve Yahweh, praise him, 

Psa 1 35:2 serving in the house of Yahweh, in the courts of the house of our God. 

Psa 1 35:3 Praise Yahweh, for Yahweh is good, make music for his name — it brings joy- 
Psa 135:4 for Yahweh has chosen Jacob for himself, Israel as his own possession. 

Psa 135:5 For I know that Yahweh is great, our Lord is above all gods. 

Psa 135:6 Yahweh does whatever he pleases in heaven, on earth, in the waters and all the depths. 

Psa 1 35:7 He summons up clouds from the borders of earth, sends rain with lightning-flashes, and brings the 
wind out of his storehouse. 

Psa 135:8 He struck the first-born in Egypt, man and beast alike, 

Psa 135:9 he sent signs and wonders into the heart of Egypt, against Pharaoh and all his officials. 

Psa 135:10 He struck down many nations, he slaughtered mighty kings, 



Psa 135:1 1 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan. 

Psa 135:12 He gave their land as a birthright, a birthright to his people Israel. 

Psa 135:13 Yahweh, your name endures for ever, Yahweh, your memory is fresh from age to age. 

Psa 135:14 For Yahweh vindicates his people, feels compassion for his servants. 

Psa 135:15 The idols of the nations are silver and gold, made by human hands. 

Psa 135:16 These have mouths but say nothing, have eyes but see nothing, 

Psa 135:17 have ears but hear nothing, and they have no breath in their mouths. 

Psa 135:18 Their makers will end up like them, everyone who relies on them. 

Psa 135:19 House of Israel, bless Yahweh, House of Aaron, bless Yahweh, 

Psa 1 35:20 House of Levi, bless Yahweh, you who fear Yahweh, bless Yahweh. 

Psa 135:21 Blessed be Yahweh from Zion, he who dwells in Jerusalem! 

Psa 136:1 Alleluia! Give thanks to Yahweh for he is good, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:2 Give thanks to the God of gods, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:3 Give thanks to the Lord of lords, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:4 He alone works wonders, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:5 In wisdom he made the heavens, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:6 He set the earth firm on the waters, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:7 He made the great lights, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:8 The sun to rule the day, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:9 Moon and stars to rule the night, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:10 He struck down the first-born of Egypt, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:1 1 He brought Israel out from among them, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:12 With mighty hand and outstretched arm, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:13 He split the Sea of Reeds in two, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:14 Let Israel pass through the middle, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:15 And drowned Pharaoh and all his army, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:16 He led his people through the desert, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:17 He struck down mighty kings, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:18 Slaughtered famous kings, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:19 Sihon king of the Amorites, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:20 And Og king of Bashan, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:21 He gave their land as a birthright, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:22 A birthright to his servant Israel, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:23 He kept us in mind when we were humbled, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:24 And rescued us from our enemies, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:25 He provides food for all living creatures, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 136:26 Give thanks to the God of heaven, for his faithful love endures for ever. 

Psa 137:1 By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept at the memory of Zion. 

Psa 137:2 On the poplars there we had hung up our harps. 

Psa 137:3 For there our gaolers had asked us to sing them a song, our captors to make merry, “Sing us one of 
the songs of Zion”. 

Psa 137:4 How could we sing a song of Yahweh on alien soil? 

Psa 137:5 If I forget you, Jerusalem, may my right hand wither! 

Psa 137:6 May my tongue remain stuck to my palate if I do not keep you in mind, if I do not count Jerusalem the 
greatest of my joys. 

Psa 137:7 Remember, Yahweh, to the Edomites’ cost, the day of Jerusalem, how they said, “Down with it! Rase 
it to the ground!”. 

Psa 137:8 Daughter of Babel, doomed to destruction, a blessing on anyone who treats you as you treated us, 
Psa 137:9 a blessing on anyone who seizes your babies and shatters them against a rock! 

Psa 138:1 [Of David] I thank you, Yahweh, with all my heart, for you have listened to the cry I uttered. In the 
presence of angels I sing to you, 

Psa 1 38:2 I bow down before your holy Temple. I praise your name for your faithful love and your constancy; 
your promises surpass even your fame. 

Psa 138:3 You heard me on the day when I called, and you gave new strength to my heart. 

Psa 138:4 All the kings of the earth give thanks to you, Yahweh, when they hear the promises you make; 

Psa 138:5 they sing of Yahweh’s ways, “Great is the glory of Yahweh!”. 

Psa 138:6 Sublime as he is, Yahweh looks on the humble, the proud he picks out from afar. 

Psa 138:7 Though I live surrounded by trouble you give me life — to my enemies’ fury! You stretch out your right 
hand and save me, 



Psa 138:8 Yahweh will do all things for me. Yahweh, your faithful love endures for ever, do not abandon what 
you have made. 

Psa 139:1 [For the choirmaster Of David Psalm] Yahweh, you examine me and know me, 

Psa 139:2 you know when I sit, when I rise, you understand my thoughts from afar. 

Psa 139:3 You watch when I walk or lie down, you know every detail of my conduct. 

Psa 139:4 A word is not yet on my tongue before you, Yahweh, know all about it. 

Psa 139:5 You fence me in, behind and in front, you have laid your hand upon me. 

Psa 139:6 Such amazing knowledge is beyond me, a height to which I cannot attain. 

Psa 139:7 Where shall I go to escape your spirit? Where shall I flee from your presence? 

Psa 139:8 If I scale the heavens you are there, if I lie flat in Sheol, there you are. 

Psa 139:9 If I speed away on the wings of the dawn, if I dwell beyond the ocean, 

Psa 139:10 even there your hand will be guiding me, your right hand holding me fast. 

Psa 139:1 1 I will say, “Let the darkness cover me, and the night wrap itself around me”, 

Psa 139:12 even darkness to you is not dark, and night is as clear as the day. 

Psa 139:13 You created my inmost self, knit me together in my mother’s womb. 

Psa 139:14 For so many marvels I thank you; a wonder am I, and all your works are wonders. You knew me 
through and through, 

Psa 139:15 my being held no secrets from you, when I was being formed in secret, textured in the depths of the 
earth. 

Psa 139:16 Your eyes could see my embryo. In your book all my days were inscribed, every one that was fixed 
is there. 

Psa 139:17 How hard for me to grasp your thoughts, how many, God, there are! 

Psa 139:18 If I count them, they are more than the grains of sand; if I come to an end, I am still with you. 

Psa 139:19 If only, God, you would kill the wicked !-Men of violence, keep away from me!- 
Psa 1 39:20 those who speak blasphemously about you, and take no account of your thoughts. 

Psa 139:21 Yahweh, do I not hate those who hate you, and loathe those who defy you? 

Psa 139:22 My hate for them has no limits, I regard them as my own enemies. 

Psa 139:23 God, examine me and know my heart, test me and know my concerns. 

Psa 1 39:24 Make sure that I am not on my way to ruin, and guide me on the road of eternity. 

Psa 140:1 [For the choirmaster Psalm Of David] Rescue me, Yahweh, from evil men, protect me from violent 
men, 

Psa 140:2 whose heart is bent on malice, day after day they harbour strife; 

Psa 140:3 their tongues as barbed as a serpent’s, viper’s venom behind their lips. Pause 

Psa 140:4 Keep me, Yahweh, from the clutches of the wicked, protect me from violent men, who are bent on 

making me stumble, laying out snares where I walk, 

Psa 140:5 in their arrogance hiding pitfall and nooseto trap me as I pass. Pause 

Psa 140:6 I said to Yahweh, “You are my God”. Listen, Yahweh, to the sound of my prayer. 

Psa 140:7 Yahweh my Lord, my saving strength, you shield my head when battle comes. 

Psa 140:8 Yahweh, do not grant the wicked their wishes, do not let their plots succeed. Pause Do not let my 

attackers 

Psa 140:9 prevail, but let them be overwhelmed by their own malice. 

Psa 140:10 May red-hot embers rain down on them, may they be flung into the mire once and for all. 

Psa 140:1 1 May the slanderer find no rest anywhere, may evil hunt down violent men implacably. 

Psa 140:12 I know that Yahweh will give judgement for the wretched, justice for the needy. 

Psa 140:13 The upright shall praise your name, the honest dwell in your presence. 

Psa 141:1 [Psalm Of David] Yahweh, I am calling, hurry to me, listen to my voice when I call to you. 

Psa 141 :2 May my prayer be like incense in your presence, my uplifted hands like the evening sacrifice. 

Psa 141 :3 Yahweh, mount a guard over my mouth, a guard at the door of my lips. 

Psa 141:4 Check any impulse to speak evil, to share the foul deeds of evil-doers. I shall not sample their 
delights! 

Psa 141 :5 May the upright correct me with a friend’s rebuke; but the wicked shall never anoint my head with oil, 
for that would make me party to their crimes. 

Psa 141 :6 They are delivered into the power of the rock, their judge, those who took pleasure in hearing me 
say, 

Psa 141 :7 “Like a shattered millstone on the ground our bones are scattered at the mouth of Sheol”. 

Psa 141 :8 To you, Yahweh, I turn my eyes, in you I take refuge, do not leave me unprotected. 

Psa 141 :9 Save me from the traps that are set for me, the snares of evil-doers. 

Psa 141:10 Let the wicked fall each into his own net, while I pass on my way. 

Psa 142:1 [Psalm Of David When he was in the cave Prayer] To Yahweh I cry out with my plea. To Yahweh I 



cry out with entreaty. 

Psa 142:2 I pour out my worry in his presence, in his presence I unfold my troubles. 

Psa 142:3 However faint my spirit; you are watching over my path. On the road I have to travel they have 
hidden a trap for me. 

Psa 142:4 Look on my right and see — there is no one who recognises me. All refuge is denied me, no one 
cares whether I live or die. 

Psa 142:5 I cry out to you, Yahweh, I affirm, “You are my refuge, my share in the land of the living!”. 

Psa 142:6 Listen to my calling, for I am miserably weak. Rescue me from my persecutors, for they are too 
strong for me. 

Psa 142:7 Lead me out of prison that I may praise your name. The upright gather round me because of your 
generosity to me. 

Psa 143:1 [Psalm Of David] Yahweh, hear my prayer, listen to my pleading; in your constancy answer me, in 
your saving justice; 

Psa 143:2 do not put your servant on trial, for no one living can be found guiltless at your tribunal. 

Psa 143:3 An enemy is in deadly pursuit, crushing me into the ground, forcing me to live in darkness, like those 
long dead. 

Psa 143:4 My spirit is faint, and within me my heart is numb with fear. 

Psa 143:5 I recall the days of old, reflecting on all your deeds, I ponder the works of your hands. 

Psa 143:6 I stretch out my hands to you, my heart like a land thirsty for you. Pause 

Psa 143:7 Answer me quickly, Yahweh, my spirit is worn out; do not turn away your face from me, or I shall be 
like those who sink into oblivion. 

Psa 143:8 Let dawn bring news of your faithful love, for I place my trust in you; show me the road I must travel 
for you to relieve my heart. 

Psa 143:9 Rescue me from my enemies, Yahweh, since in you I find protection. 

Psa 143:10 Teach me to do your will, for you are my God. May your generous spirit lead me on even ground. 
Psa 143:1 1 Yahweh, for the sake of your name, in your saving justice give me life, rescue me from distress. 

Psa 143:12 In your faithful love annihilate my enemies, destroy all those who oppress me, for I am your servant. 
Psa 144:1 [Of David] Blessed be Yahweh, my rock, who trains my hands for war and my fingers for battle, 

Psa 144:2 my faithful love, my bastion, my citadel, my Saviour; I shelter behind him, my shield, he makes the 
peoples submit to me. 

Psa 1 44:3 Yahweh, what is a human being for you to notice, a child of Adam for you to think about? 

Psa 144:4 Human life, a mere puff of wind, days as fleeting as a shadow. 

Psa 144:5 Yahweh, part the heavens and come down, touch the mountains, make them smoke. 

Psa 144:6 Scatter them with continuous lightning-flashes, rout them with a volley of your arrows. 

Psa 144:7 Stretch down your hand from above, save me, rescue me from deep waters, from the clutches of 
foreigners, 

Psa 144:8 whose every word is worthless, whose right hand is raised in perjury. 

Psa 144:9 God, I sing to you a new song, I play to you on the ten-stringed lyre, 

Psa 144:10 for you give kings their victories, you rescue your servant David. From the sword of evil 

Psa 144:1 1 save me, rescue me from the clutches of foreigners whose every word is worthless, whose right 

hand testifies to falsehood. 

Psa 144:12 May our sons be like plants growing tall from their earliest days, our daughters like pillars carved fit 
for a palace, 

Psa 144:13 our barns filled to overflowing with every kind of crop, the sheep in our pastures be numbered in 
thousands and tens of thousands, 

Psa 144:14 our cattle well fed, free of raids and pillage, free of outcry in our streets. 

Psa 144:15 How blessed the nation of whom this is true, blessed the nation whose God is Yahweh! 

Psa 145:1 [Hymn of Praise Of David] I shall praise you to the heights, God my King, I shall bless your name for 
ever and ever. 

Psa 145:2 Day after day I shall bless you, I shall praise your name for ever and ever. 

Psa 145:3 Great is Yahweh and worthy of all praise, his greatness beyond all reckoning. 

Psa 145:4 Each age will praise your deeds to the next, proclaiming your mighty works. 

Psa 1 45:5 Your renown is the splendour of your glory, I will ponder the story of your wonders. 

Psa 145:6 They will speak of your awesome power, and I shall recount your greatness. 

Psa 145:7 They will bring out the memory of your great generosity, and joyfully acclaim your saving justice. 

Psa 145:8 Yahweh is tenderness and pity, slow to anger, full of faithful love. 

Psa 145:9 Yahweh is generous to all, his tenderness embraces all his creatures. 

Psa 145:10 All your creatures shall thank you, Yahweh, and yourfaithful shall bless you. 

Psa 145:1 1 They shall speak of the glory of your kingship and tell of your might, 



Psa 145:12 making known your mighty deeds to the children of Adam, the glory and majesty of your kingship. 
Psa 145:13 Your kingship is a kingship for ever, your reign lasts from age to age. Yahweh is trustworthy in all 
his words, and upright in all his deeds. 

Psa 145:14 Yahweh supports all who stumble, lifts up those who are bowed down. 

Psa 145:15 All look to you in hope and you feed them with the food of the season. 

Psa 145:16 And, with generous hand, you satisfy the desires of every living creature. 

Psa 145:17 Upright in all that he does, Yahweh acts only in faithful love. 

Psa 145:18 He is close to all who call upon him, all who call on him from the heart. 

Psa 145:19 He fulfils the desires of all who fear him, he hears their cry and he saves them. 

Psa 145:20 Yahweh guards all who love him, but all the wicked he destroys. 

Psa 145:21 My mouth shall always praise Yahweh, let every creature bless his holy name for ever and ever. 

Psa 146:1 Alleluia! Praise Yahweh, my soul! 

Psa 146:2 I will praise Yahweh all my life, I will make music to my God as long as I live. 

Psa 146:3 Do not put your trust in princes, in any child of Adam, who has no power to save. 

Psa 146:4 When his spirit goes forth he returns to the earth, on that very day all his plans come to nothing. 

Psa 146:5 How blessed is he who has Jacob’s God to help him, his hope is in Yahweh his God, 

Psa 146:6 who made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is in them. He keeps faith for ever, 

Psa 146:7 gives justice to the oppressed, gives food to the hungry; Yahweh sets prisoners free. 

Psa 146:8 Yahweh gives sight to the blind, lifts up those who are bowed down. 

Psa 146:9 Yahweh protects the stranger, he sustains the orphan and the widow. Yahweh loves the upright, but 
he frustrates the wicked. 

Psa 146:10 Yahweh reigns for ever, your God, Zion, from age to age. 

Psa 147:1 Alleluia! Praise Yahweh — it is good to sing psalms to our God — how pleasant to praise him. 

Psa 147:2 Yahweh, Builder of Jerusalem! He gathers together the exiles of Israel, 

Psa 147:3 healing the broken-hearted and binding up their wounds; 

Psa 147:4 he counts out the number of the stars, and gives each one of them a name. 

Psa 147:5 Our Lord is great, all-powerful, his wisdom beyond all telling. 

Psa 147:6 Yahweh sustains the poor, and humbles the wicked to the ground. 

Psa 147:7 Sing to Yahweh in thanksgiving, play the harp for our God. 

Psa 147:8 He veils the sky with clouds, and provides the earth with rain, makes grass grow on the hills and 
plants for people to use, 

Psa 147:9 gives fodder to cattle and to young ravens when they cry. 

Psa 147:10 He takes no delight in the power of horses, no pleasure in human sturdiness; 

Psa 147:1 1 his pleasure is in those who fear him, in those who hope in his faithful love. 

Psa 147:12 Praise Yahweh, Jerusalem, Zion, praise your God. 

Psa 147:13 For he gives strength to the bars of your gates, he blesses your children within you, 

Psa 147:14 he maintains the peace of your frontiers, gives you your fill of finest wheat. 

Psa 147:15 He sends his word to the earth, his command runs quickly, 

Psa 147:16 he spreads the snow like flax, strews hoarfrost like ashes, 

Psa 147:17 he sends ice-crystals like breadcrumbs, and who can withstand that cold? 

Psa 147:18 When he sends his word it thaws them, when he makes his wind blow, the waters are unstopped. 
Psa 147:19 He reveals his word to Jacob, his statutes and judgements to Israel. 

Psa 147:20 For no other nation has he done this, no other has known his judgements. 

Psa 148:1 Alleluia! Praise Yahweh from the heavens, praise him in the heights. 

Psa 148:2 Praise him, all his angels, praise him, all his host! 

Psa 148:3 Praise him, sun and moon, praise him, all shining stars, 

Psa 148:4 praise him, highest heavens, praise him, waters above the heavens. 

Psa 1 48:5 Let them praise the name of Yahweh at whose command they were made; 

Psa 148:6 he established them for ever and ever by an unchanging decree. 

Psa 148:7 Praise Yahweh from the earth, sea-monsters and all the depths, 

Psa 148:8 fire and hail, snow and mist, storm-winds that obey his word, 

Psa 148:9 mountains and every hill, orchards and every cedar, 

Psa 148:10 wild animals and all cattle, reptiles and winged birds, 

Psa 148:11 kings of the earth and all nations, princes and all judges on earth, 

Psa 148:12 young men and girls, old people and children together. 

Psa 148:13 Let them praise the name of Yahweh, for his name alone is sublime, his splendour transcends earth 
and heaven. 

Psa 148:14 For he heightens the strength of his people, to the praise of all his faithful, the children of Israel, the 
people close to him. 



Psa 149:1 Alleluia! Sing a new song to Yahweh: his praise in the assembly of the faithful! 

Psa 149:2 Israel shall rejoice in its Maker, the children of Zion delight in their king; 

Psa 149:3 they shall dance in praise of his name, play to him on tambourines and harp! 

Psa 149:4 For Yahweh loves his people, he will crown the humble with salvation. 

Psa 149:5 The faithful exult in glory, shout for joy as they worship him, 

Psa 149:6 praising God to the heights with their voices, a two-edged sword in their hands, 

Psa 149:7 to wreak vengeance on the nations, punishment on the peoples, 

Psa 149:8 to load their kings with chains and their nobles with iron fetters, 

Psa 1 49:9 to execute on them the judgement passed — to the honour of all his faithful. 

Psa 150:1 Alleluia! Praise God in his holy place, praise him in the heavenly vault of his power, 

Psa 150:2 praise him for his mighty deeds, praise him for all his greatness. 

Psa 150:3 Praise him with fanfare of trumpet, praise him with harp and lyre, 

Psa 150:4 praise him with tambourines and dancing, praise him with strings and pipes, 

Psa 1 50:5 praise him with the clamour of cymbals, praise him with triumphant cymbals, 

Psa 150:6 Let everything that breathes praise Yahweh. Alleluia! 

Pro 1:1 The proverbs of Solomon son of David, king of Israel: 

Pro 1 :2 for learning what wisdom and discipline are, for understanding words of deep meaning, 

Pro 1 :3 for acquiring a disciplined insight, uprightness, justice and fair dealing; 

Pro 1 :4 for teaching sound judgement to the simple, and knowledge and reflection to the young; 

Pro 1 :5 Let the wise listen and learn yet more, and a person of discernment will acquire the art of guidance. 

Pro 1 :6 for perceiving the meaning of proverbs and obscure sayings, the sayings of the sages and their riddles. 
Pro 1 :7 The fear of Yahweh is the beginning of knowledge; fools spurn wisdom and discipline. 

Pro 1 :8 Listen, my child, to your father’s instruction, do not reject your mother’s teaching: 

Pro 1 :9 they will be a crown of grace for your head, a circlet for your neck. 

Pro 1:10 My child, if sinners try to seduce you, do not go with them. 

Pro 1:11 If they say, “Come with us: let us lie in ambush to shed blood; if we plan an ambush for the innocent 
without provocation, 

Pro 1:12 we can swallow them alive, like Sheol, and whole, like those who sink into oblivion. 

Pro 1:13 We shall find treasures of every sort, we shall fill our houses with plunder; 

Pro 1:14 throw in your lot with us: one purse between us all”. 

Pro 1:15 My child, do not follow them in their way, keep your steps out of their path 
Pro 1:16 for their feet hasten to evil, they are quick to shed blood; 

Pro 1:17 for the net is spread in vain if any winged creature can see it. 

Pro 1:18 It is for their own blood such people lie in wait, their ambush is against their own selves! 

Pro 1:19 Such are the paths of all who seek dishonest gain: which robs of their lives all who take it for their own. 
Pro 1 :20 Wisdom calls aloud in the streets, she raises her voice in the public squares; 

Pro 1 :21 she calls out at the street corners, she delivers her message at the city gates. 

Pro 1 :22 “You simple people, how much longer will you cling to your simple ways? How much longer will 
mockers revel in their mocking and fools go on hating knowledge? 

Pro 1 :23 Pay attention to my warning. To you I will pour out my heart and tell you what I have to say. 

Pro 1 :24 Since I have called and you have refused me, since I have beckoned and no one has taken notice, 

Pro 1 :25 since you have ignored all my advice and rejected all my warnings, 

Pro 1 :26 I, for my part, shall laugh at your distress, I shall jeer when terror befalls you, 

Pro 1:27 when terror befalls you, like a storm, when your distress arrives, like a whirlwind, when ordeal and 
anguish bear down on you. 

Pro 1 :28 Then they will call me, but I shall not answer, they will look eagerly for me and will not find me. 

Pro 1 :29 They have hated knowledge, they have not chosen the fear of Yahweh, 

Pro 1:30 they have taken no notice of my advice, they have spurned all my warnings: 

Pro 1 :31 so they will have to eat the fruits of their own ways of life, and choke themselves with their own 

scheming. 

Pro 1 :32 For the errors of the simple lead to their death, the complacency of fools works their own ruin; 

Pro 1:33 but whoëver listens to me may live secure, will have quiet, fearing no mischance”. 

Pro 2:1 My child, if you take my words to heart, if you set store by my commandments, 

Pro 2:2 tuning your ear to wisdom, tuning your heart to understanding, 

Pro 2:3 yes, if your plea is for clear perception, if you cry out for understanding, 

Pro 2:4 if you look for it as though for silver, search for it as though for buried treasure, 

Pro 2:5 then you will understand what the fear of Yahweh is, and discover the knowledge of God. 

Pro 2:6 For Yahweh himself is giver of wisdom, from his mouth issue knowledge and understanding. 

Pro 2:7 He reserves his advice for the honest, a shield to those whose ways are sound; 



Pro 2:8 he stands guard over the paths of equity, he keeps watch over the way of those faithful to him. 

Pro 2:9 Then you will understand uprightness, equity and fair dealing, the paths that lead to happiness. 

Pro 2:10 When wisdom comes into your heart and knowledge fills your soul with delight, 

Pro 2:1 1 then prudence will be there to watch over you, and understanding will be your guardian 
Pro 2:12 to keep you from the way that is evil, from those whose speech is deceitful, 

Pro 2:13 from those who leave the paths of honesty to walk the roads of darkness: 

Pro 2:14 those who find their joy in doing wrong, and their delight in deceitfulness, 

Pro 2:15 whose tracks are twisted, and the paths that they tread crooked. 

Pro 2:16 To keep you, too, from the woman who belongs to another, from the stranger, with her wheedling 
words; 

Pro 2:17 she has left the partner of her younger days, she has forgotten the covenant of her God; 

Pro 2:18 her house is tilting towards Death, down to the Shades go her paths. 

Pro 2:19 Of those who go to her not one returns, they never regain the paths of life. 

Pro 2:20 Thus you will tread the way of good people, persisting in the paths of the upright. 

Pro 2:21 For the land will be for the honest to live in, the innocent will have it for their home; 

Pro 2:22 while the wicked will be cut off from the land, and the faithless rooted out of it. 

Pro 3:1 My child, do not forget my teaching, let your heart keep my principles, 

Pro 3:2 since they will increase your length of days, your years of life and your well-being. 

Pro 3:3 Let faithful love and constancy never leave you: tie them round your neck, write them on the tablet of 
your heart. 

Pro 3:4 Thus you will find favour and success in the sight of God and of people. 

Pro 3:5 Trust wholeheartedly in Yahweh, put no faith in your own perception; 

Pro 3:6 acknowledge him in every course you take, and he will see that your paths are smooth. 

Pro 3:7 Do not congratulate yourself on your own wisdom, fear Yahweh and turn your back on evil: 

Pro 3:8 health-giving, this, to your body, relief to your bones. 

Pro 3:9 Honour Yahweh with what goods you have and with the first-fruits of all your produce; 

Pro 3:10 then your barns will be filled with corn, your vats overflowing with new wine. 

Pro 3:1 1 My child, do not scorn correction from Yahweh, do not resent his reproof; 

Pro 3:12 for Yahweh reproves those he loves, as a father the child whom he loves. 

Pro 3:13 Blessed are those who have discovered wisdom, those who have acquired understanding! 

Pro 3:14 Gaining her is more rewarding than silver, her yield is more valuable than gold. 

Pro 3:15 She is beyond the price of pearls, nothing you could covet is her equal. 

Pro 3:16 In her right hand is length of days; in her left hand, riches and honour. 

Pro 3:17 Her ways are filled with delight, her paths all lead to contentment. 

Pro 3:18 She is a tree of life for those who hold her fast, those who cling to her live happy lives. 

Pro 3:19 In wisdom, Yahweh laid the earth’s foundations, in understanding he spread out the heavens. 

Pro 3:20 Through his knowledge the depths were cleft open, and the clouds distil the dew. 

Pro 3:21 My child, hold to sound advice and prudence, never let them out of sight; 

Pro 3:22 they will give life to your soul and beauty to your neck. 

Pro 3:23 You will go on your way in safety, your feet will not stumble. 

Pro 3:24 When you go to bed, you will not be afraid; once in bed, your sleep will be sweet. 

Pro 3:25 Have no fear either of sudden terror or of attack mounted by wicked men, 

Pro 3:26 since Yahweh will be your guarantor, he will keep your steps from the snare. 

Pro 3:27 Refuse no kindness to those who have a right to it, if it is in your power to perform it. 

Pro 3:28 Do not say to your neighbour, “Go away! Come another time! I will give it you tomorrow,’ if you can do it 

now. 

Pro 3:29 Do not plot harm against your neighbour who is living unsuspecting beside you. 

Pro 3:30 Do not pick a groundless quarrel with anyone who has done you no harm. 

Pro 3:31 Do not envy the man of violence, never model your conduct on his; 

Pro 3:32 for the wilful wrong-doer is abhorrent to Yahweh, who confides only in the honest. 

Pro 3:33 Yahweh’s curse lies on the house of the wicked, but he blesses the home of the upright. 

Pro 3:34 He mocks those who mock, but accords his favour to the humble. 

Pro 3:35 Glory is the portion of the wise, all that fools inherit is contempt. 

Pro 4:1 Listen, my children, to a father’s instruction; pay attention, and learn what understanding is. 

Pro 4:2 What I am offering you is sound doctrine: do not forsake my teaching. 

Pro 4:3 I too was once a child with a father, in my mother’s eyes a tender child, unique. 

Pro 4:4 This was what he used to teach me, “Let your heart treasure what I have to say, keep my principles and 
you will live; 

Pro 4:5 acquire wisdom, acquire understanding, never forget her, never deviate from my words. 



Pro 4:6 Do not desert her, she will keep you safe; love her, she will watch over you. 

Pro 4:7 The first principle of wisdom is: acquire wisdom; at the cost of all you have, acquire understanding! 

Pro 4:8 Hold her close, and she will make you great; embrace her, and she will be your pride; 

Pro 4:9 she will provide a graceful garland for your head, bestow a crown of honour on you”. 

Pro 4:10 Listen, my child, take my words to heart, and the years of your life will be multiplied. 

Pro 4:11 I have educated you in the ways of wisdom, I have guided you along the path of honesty. 

Pro 4:12 When you walk, your going will be unhindered, if you run, you will not stumble. 

Pro 4:13 Hold fast to discipline, never let her go, keep your eyes on her, she is your life. 

Pro 4:14 Do not follow the path of the wicked, do not walk the way that the evil go. 

Pro 4:15 Avoid it, do not take it, turn your back on it, pass it by. 

Pro 4:16 For they cannot sleep unless they have first done wrong, they miss their sleep if they have not made 
someöne stumble; 

Pro 4:17 for the bread of wickedness is what they eat, and the wine of violence is what they drink. 

Pro 4:18 The path of the upright is like the light of dawn, its brightness growing to the fullness of day; 

Pro 4:19 the way of the wicked is as dark as night, they cannot tell the obstacles they stumble over. 

Pro 4:20 My child, pay attention to what I am telling you, listen carefully to my words; 

Pro 4:21 do not let them out of your sight, keep them deep in your heart. 

Pro 4:22 For they are life to those who find them and health to all humanity. 

Pro 4:23 More than all else, keep watch over your heart, since here are the wellsprings of life. 

Pro 4:24 Turn your back on the mouth that misleads, keep your distance from lips that deceive. 

Pro 4:25 Let your eyes be fixed ahead, your gaze be straight before you. 

Pro 4:26 Let the path you tread be level and all your ways be firm. 

Pro 4:27 Turn neither to right nor to left, keep your foot clear of evil. 

Pro 5:1 My son, pay attention to my wisdom, listen carefully to what I know; 

Pro 5:2 so that you may preserve discretion and your lips may guard knowledge. Take no notice of a loose- 
living woman, 

Pro 5:3 for the lips of the adulteress drip with honey, her palate is more unctuous than oil, 

Pro 5:4 but in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. 

Pro 5:5 Her feet go down to death, Sheol the goal of her steps; 

Pro 5:6 far from following the path of life, her course is uncertain and she does not know it. 

Pro 5:7 And now, son, listen to me, never deviate from what I say: 

Pro 5:8 set your course as far from her as possible, go nowhere near the door of her house, 

Pro 5:9 or she will hand over your honour to others, the years of your life to a man without pity, 

Pro 5:10 and strangers will batten on your property, and your produce go to the house of a stranger, 

Pro 5:1 1 and, at your ending, your body and flesh having been consumed, you will groan 
Pro 5:12 and exclaim, “Alas, I hated discipline, my heart spurned all correction; 

Pro 5:13 I would not attend to the voice of my masters, I would not listen to those who tried to teach me. 

Pro 5:14 Now I have come to nearly every kind of misery, in the assembly and in the community”. 

Pro 5:15 Drink the water from your own storage-well, fresh water from your own spring. 

Pro 5:16 Even if your fountains overflow outside, your streams of water in the public squares: 

Pro 5:17 let them be for you alone, and not for strangers with you. 

Pro 5:18 May your fountain-head be blessed! Find joy with the wife you married in your youth, 

Pro 5:19 fair as a hind, graceful as a fawn: hers the breasts that ever fill you with delight, hers the love that ever 
holds you captive. 

Pro 5:20 Why be seduced, my son, by someöne else’s wife, and fondle the breast of a woman who belongs to 
another? 

Pro 5:21 For the eyes of Yahweh observe human ways, and survey all human paths. 

Pro 5:22 The wicked is snared in his own misdeeds, is caught in the meshes of his own sin. 

Pro 5:23 For want of discipline, he dies, led astray by his own excessive folly. 

Pro 6:1 My child, if you have gone surety for your neighbour, if you have guaranteed the bond of a stranger, 

Pro 6:2 if you have committed yourself with your lips, if through words of yours you have been entrapped, 

Pro 6:3 do this, my child, to extricate yourself — since you have put yourself in the power of your neighbour: go, 
humble yourself, plead with your neighbour, 

Pro 6:4 give your eyes no sleep, your eyelids no rest, 

Pro 6:5 break free like a gazelle from the trap, like a bird from the fowler’s clutches. 

Pro 6:6 Idler, go to the ant; ponder her ways and grow wise: 

Pro 6:7 no one gives her orders, no overseer, no master, 

Pro 6:8 yet all through the summer she gets her food ready, and gathers her supplies at harvest time. 

Pro 6:9 How long do you intend to lie there, idler? When are you going to rise from your sleep? 



Pro 6:10 A little sleep, a little drowsiness, a little folding of the arms to lie back, 

Pro 6:1 1 and poverty comes like a vagrant and, like a beggar, dearth. 

Pro 6:12 A scoundrel, a vicious man, he goes with a leer on his lips, 

Pro 6:13 winking his eye, shuffling his foot, beckoning with his finger. 

Pro 6:14 Trickery in his heart, always scheming evil, he sows dissension. 

Pro 6:15 Disaster will overtake him sharply for this, suddenly, irretrievably, he will be broken. 

Pro 6:16 There are six things that Yahweh hates, seven that he abhors: 

Pro 6:17 a haughty look, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, 

Pro 6:18 a heart that weaves wicked plots, feet that hurry to do evil, 

Pro 6:19 a false witness who lies with every breath, and one who sows dissension among brothers. 

Pro 6:20 Keep your father’s precept, my child, do not spurn your mother’s teaching. 

Pro 6:21 Bind them ever to your heart, tie them round your neck. 

Pro 6:22 While you are active, they will guide you, when you fall asleep, they will watch over you, when you 
wake up, they will converse with you. 

Pro 6:23 For the precept is a lamp, the teaching is a light; correction and discipline are the way to life, 

Pro 6:24 preserving you from the woman of bad character, from the wheedling talk of a woman who belongs to 
another. 

Pro 6:25 Do not covet her beauty in your heart or let her captivate you with the play of her eyes; 

Pro 6:26 a prostitute can be bought for a hunk of bread, but a married woman aims to snare a precious life. 

Pro 6:27 Can a man carry fire inside his shirt without setting his clothes alight? 

Pro 6:28 Can you walk on red-hot coals without burning your feet? 

Pro 6:29 Just so, the man who makes love to his neighbour’s wife: no one who touches her will get off 
unpunished. 

Pro 6:30 People attach but little blame to a thief who steals only to satisfy his hunger; 

Pro 6:31 yet even he, if caught, will have to repay sevenfold and hand over all his family resources. 

Pro 6:32 But the adulterer has no sense; he works his own destruction. 

Pro 6:33 All he will get is blows and contempt, and dishonour never to be blotted out. 

Pro 6:34 For jealousy inflames the husband who will show no mercy when the day comes for revenge; 

Pro 6:35 he will not consider any compensation; lavish what gifts you may, he will not be placated. 

Pro 7:1 My child, keep my words, and treasure my precepts, 

Pro 7:2 keep my precepts and you will live, keep my teaching as the apple of your eye. 

Pro 7:3 Bind these to your fingers, write them on the tablet of your heart. 

Pro 7:4 Say to Wisdom, “You are my sister!”. Call Understanding your relation, 

Pro 7:5 to save yourself from the woman that belongs to another, from the stranger, with her seductive words. 

Pro 7:6 While I was at the window of my house, I was looking out through the lattice 

Pro 7:7 and I saw, among the callow youths, I noticed among the lads, one boy who had no sense. 

Pro 7:8 Going along the lane, near the corner where she lives, he reaches the path to her house, 

Pro 7:9 at twilight when day is declining, at dead of night and in the dark. 

Pro 7:10 And look, a woman is coming to meet him, dressed like a prostitute, false of heart. 

Pro 7:1 1 She is loud and brazen; her feet cannot rest at home. 

Pro 7:12 Once in the street, once in the square, she lurks at every corner. 

Pro 7:13 She catches hold of him, she kisses him, the bold-faced creature says to him, 

Pro 7:14 “I had to offer a communion sacrifice, I have discharged my vows today; 

Pro 7:15 that is why I came out to meet you, to look for you, and now I have found you. 

Pro 7:16 I have spread coverlets over my divan, embroidered stuff, Egyptian material, 

Pro 7:17 I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, with aloes and cinnamon. 

Pro 7:18 Come on, we'll make love as much as we like, till morning. Let us enjoy the delights of love! 

Pro 7:19 For my husband is not at home, he has gone on a very long journey, 

Pro 7:20 taking his moneybags with him; he will not be back till the moon is full”. 

Pro 7:21 With her persistent coaxing she overcomes him, lures him on with her wheedling patter. 

Pro 7:22 Forthwith he follows her, like an ox on its way to the slaughterhouse, like a madman on his way to the 
stocks, 

Pro 7:23 until an arrow pierces him to the liver, like the bird that dashes into the net without realising that its life 
is at stake. 

Pro 7:24 And now, son, listen to me, pay attention to the words I have to say: 

Pro 7:25 do not let your heart stray into her ways, or wander into her paths; 

Pro 7:26 she has done so many to death, and the strongest have all been her victims. 

Pro 7:27 Her house is the way to Sheol, the descent to the courts of death. 

Pro 8:1 Is not Wisdom calling? Is not Understanding raising her voice? 



Pro 8:2 On the heights overlooking the road, at the crossways, she takes her stand; 

Pro 8:3 by the gates, at the entrance to the city, on the access-roads, she cries out, 

Pro 8:4 “I am calling to you, all people, my words are addressed to all humanity. 

Pro 8:5 Simpletons, learn how to behave, fools, come to your senses. 

Pro 8:6 Listen, I have something important to tell you, when I speak, my words are right. 

Pro 8:7 My mouth proclaims the truth, for evil is abhorrent to my lips. 

Pro 8:8 All the words from my mouth are upright, nothing false there, nothing crooked, 

Pro 8:9 everything plain, if you can understand, straight, if you have acquired knowledge. 

Pro 8:10 Accept my discipline rather than silver, and knowledge of me in preference to finest gold. 

Pro 8:11 For Wisdom is more precious than jewels, and nothing else is so worthy of desire. 

Pro 8:12 “I, Wisdom, share house with Discretion, I am mistress of the art of thought. 

Pro 8:13 (Fear of Yahweh means hatred of evil.) I hate pride and arrogance, wicked behaviour and a lying 
mouth. 

Pro 8:14 To me belong good advice and prudence, I am perception: power is mine! 

Pro 8:15 By me monarchs rule and princes decree what is right; 

Pro 8:16 by me rulers govern, so do nobles, the lawful authorities. 

Pro 8:17 I love those who love me; whoëver searches eagerly for me finds me. 

Pro 8:18 With me are riches and honour, lasting wealth and saving justice. 

Pro 8:19 The fruit I give is better than gold, even the finest, the return I make is better than pure silver. 

Pro 8:20 I walk in the way of uprightness in the path of justice, 

Pro 8:21 to endow my friends with my wealth and to fill their treasuries. 

Pro 8:22 “Yahweh created me, first-fruits of his fashioning, before the oldest of his works. 

Pro 8:23 From everlasting, I was firmly set, from the beginning, before the earth came into being. 

Pro 8:24 The deep was not, when I was born, nor were the springs with their abounding waters. 

Pro 8:25 Before the mountains were settled, before the hills, I came to birth; 

Pro 8:26 before he had made the earth, the countryside, and the first elements of the world. 

Pro 8:27 When he fixed the heavens firm, I was there, when he drew a circle on the surface of the deep, 

Pro 8:28 when he thickened the clouds above, when the sources of the deep began to swell, 

Pro 8:29 when he assigned the sea its boundaries — and the waters will not encroach on the shore — when he 
traced the foundations of the earth, 

Pro 8:30 I was beside the master craftsman, delighting him day after day, ever at play in his presence, 

Pro 8:31 at play everywhere on his earth, delighting to be with the children of men. 

Pro 8:32 “And now, my children, listen to me. Happy are those who keep my ways. 

Pro 8:33 Listen to instruction and become wise, do not reject it. 

Pro 8:34 Blessed, whoëver listens to me, who day after day keeps watch at my gates to guard my portals. 

Pro 8:35 For whoëver finds me finds life, and obtains the favour of Yahweh; 

Pro 8:36 but whoëver misses me harms himself, all who hate me are in love with death”. 

Pro 9:1 Wisdom has built herself a house, she has hewn her seven pillars, 

Pro 9:2 she has slaughtered her beasts, drawn her wine, she has laid her table. 

Pro 9:3 She has despatched her maidservants and proclaimed from the heights above the city, 

Pro 9:4 “Who is simple? Let him come this way”. To the fool she says, 

Pro 9:5 “Come and eat my bread, drink the wine which I have drawn! 

Pro 9:6 Leave foolishness behind and you will live, go forwards in the ways of perception”. 

Pro 9:7 Reprove a mocker and you attract contempt, rebuke the wicked and you attract dishonour. 

Pro 9:8 Do not rebuke the mocker, he will hate you. Rebuke the wise and he will love you for it. 

Pro 9:9 Be open with the wise, he grows wiser still, teach the upright, he will gain yet more. 

Pro 9:10 The first principle of wisdom is the fear of Yahweh, What God’s holy ones know — this is 
understanding. 

Pro 9:1 1 For by me your days will be multiplied, and your years of life increased. 

Pro 9:12 Are you wise? You are wise to your own good. A mocker? The burden is yours alone. 

Pro 9:13 A silly woman acts on impulse, is foolish and knows nothing. 

Pro 9:14 She sits at the door of her house, on a throne high up in the city, 

Pro 9:15 calling to the passers-by, who are walking straight past on their way, 

Pro 9:16 “Who is simple? Turn aside, come over here”. To the fool she says, 

Pro 9:17 “Stolen waters are sweet, and bread tastes better when eaten in secret”. 

Pro 9:18 But the fool does not know that this is where the Shades are and that her guests are already in the 
vales of Sheol. 

Pro 10:1 The proverbs of Solomon. A wise child is a father’s joy, a foolish child a mother’s grief. 

Pro 10:2 Treasures wickedly come by give no benefit, but uprightness brings delivery from death. 



Pro 1 0:3 Yahweh does not let the upright go hungry, but he thwarts the greed of the wicked. 

Pro 1 0:4 A slack hand brings poverty, but the hand of the diligent brings wealth. 

Pro 10:5 Reaping at harvest-time is the mark of the prudent, sleeping at harvest-time is the sign of the 
worthless. 

Pro 1 0:6 Blessings are on the head of the upright, but the mouth of the godless is a cover for violence. 

Pro 10:7 The upright is remembered with blessings, the name of the wicked rots away. 

Pro 10:8 The wise of heart takes orders, but a gabbling fool heads for ruin. 

Pro 10:9 Anyone whose ways are honourable walks secure, but whoëver follows crooked ways is soon 
unmasked. 

Pro 10:10 A wink of the eye brings trouble, a bold rebuke brings peace. 

Pro 10:1 1 The mouth of the upright is a life-giving fountain, but the mouth of the godless is a cover for violence. 
Pro 10:12 Hatred provokes disputes, but love excuses all offences. 

Pro 10:13 On the lips of the discerning is found wisdom, on the back of a fool, the stick. 

Pro 10:14 Wise people store up knowledge, but the mouth of a fool makes ruin imminent. 

Pro 10:15 The wealth of the rich is their stronghold, poverty is the undoing of the weak. 

Pro 10:16 The wage of the upright affords life, but sin is all the wicked earns. 

Pro 10:17 Whoëver abides by discipline, walks towards life, whoëver ignores correction goes astray. 

Pro 10:18 Liars’ lips are a cover for hatred, whoëver utters slander is a fool. 

Pro 10:19 A flood of words is never without fault; whoëver controls the lips is wise. 

Pro 1 0:20 The tongue of the upright is purest silver, the heart of the wicked is of trumpery value. 

Pro 1 0:21 The lips of the upright nourish many peoples, but fools die for want of sense. 

Pro 10:22 The blessing of Yahweh is what brings riches, to this, hard toil has nothing to add. 

Pro 10:23 A fool takes pleasure in doing wrong, the intelligent in cultivating wisdom. 

Pro 1 0:24 What the wicked fears overtakes him, what the upright desires comes to him as a present. 

Pro 10:25 When the storm is over, the wicked is no more, but the upright stands firm for ever. 

Pro 1 0:26 As vinegar to the teeth, smoke to the eyes, so the sluggard to the one who sends him. 

Pro 10:27 The fear of Yahweh adds length to life, the years of the wicked will be cut short. 

Pro 10:28 The hope of the upright is joy, the expectations of the wicked come to nothing. 

Pro 1 0:29 The way of Yahweh is a rampart for the honest, for evil-doers nothing but ruin. 

Pro 1 0:30 The upright will never have to give way, but the land will offer no home for the wicked. 

Pro 1 0:31 The mouth of the upright utters wisdom, the tongue that deceives will be cut off. 

Pro 1 0:32 The lips of the upright know about kindness, the mouth of the wicked about deceit. 

Pro 11:1 A false balance is abhorrent to Yahweh, a just weight is pleasing to him. 

Pro 1 1 :2 Pride comes first; disgrace soon follows; with the humble is wisdom found. 

Pro 1 1 :3 The honest have their own honesty for guidance, the treacherous are ruined by their own perfidy. 

Pro 1 1 :4 In the day of retribution riches will be useless, but uprightness delivers from death. 

Pro 1 1 :5 The uprightness of the good makes their way straight, the wicked fall by their own wickedness. 

Pro 1 1 :6 Their uprightness sets the honest free, the treacherous are imprisoned by their own desires. 

Pro 1 1 :7 The hope of the wicked perishes with death, hope placed in riches comes to nothing. 

Pro 1 1 :8 The upright escapes affliction, the wicked incurs it instead. 

Pro 1 1 :9 Through his mouth the godless is the ruin of his neighbour, but by knowledge the upright are 
safeguarded. 

Pro 11:10 When the upright prosper the city rejoices, when the wicked are ruined there is a shout of joy. 

Pro 11:11 A city is raised on the blessing of the honest, and demolished by the mouth of the wicked. 

Pro 11:12 Whoëver looks down on a neighbour lacks good sense; the intelligent keeps a check on the tongue. 
Pro 11:13 A tittle-tattler lets secrets out, the trustworthy keeps things hidden. 

Pro 11:14 For want of leadership a people perishes, safety lies in many advisers. 

Pro 11:15 Whoëver goes bail for a stranger does himself harm, but one who shuns going surety is safe. 

Pro 11:16 A gracious woman acquires honour, violent people acquire wealth. 

Pro 11:17 Faithful love brings its own reward, the inflexible injure their own selves. 

Pro 11:18 Disappointment crowns the labours of the wicked, whoëver sows uprightness reaps a solid reward. 
Pro 11:19 Whoëver establishes uprightness is on the way to life, whoëver pursues evil, on the way to death. 

Pro 1 1 :20 Tortuous hearts are abhorrent to Yahweh, dear to him, those whose ways are blameless. 

Pro 1 1 :21 Be sure of it, the wicked will not go unpunished, but the race of the upright will come to no harm. 

Pro 1 1 :22 A golden ring in the snout of a pig is a lovely woman who lacks discretion. 

Pro 11:23 The hope of the upright is nothing but good, the expectation of the wicked is retribution. 

Pro 1 1 :24 One scatters money around, yet only adds to his wealth, another is excessively mean, but only grows 
the poorer. 

Pro 1 1 :25 The soul who blesses will prosper, whoëver satisfies others will also be satisfied. 



Pro 1 1 :26 The people’s curse is on those who hoard the wheat, their blessing on the head of those who sell it. 
Pro 1 1 .21 Whoëver strives for good obtains favour, whoëver looks for evil will get an evil return. 

Pro 1 1 :28 Whoëver trusts in riches will have a fall, the upright will flourish like the leaves. 

Pro 1 1 :29 Whoëver misgoverns a house inherits the wind, and the fool becomes slave to the wise. 

Pro 1 1 :30 The fruit of the upright is a tree of life: the sage captivates souls. 

Pro 1 1 :31 If here on earth the upright gets due reward, how much more the wicked and the sinner! 

Pro 12:1 Whoëver loves discipline, loves knowledge, stupid are those who hate correction. 

Pro 12:2 The honest obtains Yahweh’s favour, the schemer incurs his condemnation. 

Pro 12:3 No one is made secure by wickedness, but nothing shakes the roots of the upright. 

Pro 12:4 A capable wife, her husband’s crown, a shameless wife, a cancer in his bones. 

Pro 12:5 The plans of the upright are honest, the intrigues of the wicked are full of deceit. 

Pro 12:6 The words of the wicked are snares to shed blood, what the honest say keeps them safe. 

Pro 12:7 Once thrown down, the wicked are no more, but the house of the upright stands firm. 

Pro 12:8 Prudence wins praise, but a tortuous heart incurs only contempt. 

Pro 12:9 Better a common fellow who has a slave than someöne who gives himself airs and has nothing to eat. 
Pro 12:10 The upright has compassion on his animals, but the heart of the wicked is ruthless. 

Pro 12:1 1 Whoëver works his land shall have bread and to spare, but no one who chases fantasies has any 
sense. 

Pro 12:12 The godless delights in the snare of the wicked, but the root of the upright bears fruit. 

Pro 12:13 In the sin of the lips lies a disastrous trap, but the upright finds a way out of misfortune. 

Pro 12:14 Abundance of good things is the fruit of the lips; labour brings its own return. 

Pro 12:15 Fools think the way they go is straight, the wise listens to advice. 

Pro 12:16 The fool shows anger straightaway, the discreet conceals dislike. 

Pro 12:17 To tell the truth is to further justice, a false witness is nothing but deceit. 

Pro 12:18 Thoughtless words can wound like a sword, but the tongue of the wise brings healing. 

Pro 12:19 Sincere lips endure for ever, the lying tongue lasts only a moment. 

Pro 12:20 Deceit is in the heart of the schemer, joy with those who give counsels of peace. 

Pro 12:21 No harm can come to the upright, but the wicked are swamped by misfortunes. 

Pro 12:22 Lying lips are abhorrent to Yahweh; dear to him those who make truth their way of life. 

Pro 12:23 The discreet keeps knowledge hidden, the heart of fools proclaims their folly. 

Pro 12:24 For the diligent hand, authority; for the slack hand, forced labour. 

Pro 12:25 Worry makes a heart heavy, a kindly word makes it glad. 

Pro 12:26 The upright shows the way to a friend; the way of the wicked leads them astray. 

Pro 12:27 The idle has no game to roast; diligence is anyone’s most precious possession. 

Pro 12:28 In the way of uprightness is life, the ways of the vengeful lead to death. 

Pro 13:1 A wise child listens to a father’s discipline, a cynic will not listen to reproof. 

Pro 13:2 The fruit of the mouth provides a good meal, but the soul of the treacherous feeds on violence. 

Pro 13:3 A guard on the mouth makes life secure, whoëver talks too much is lost. 

Pro 13:4 The idler hungers but has no food; hard workers get their fill. 

Pro 13:5 The upright hates a lying word, but the wicked slanders and defames. 

Pro 13:6 Uprightness stands guard over one whose way is honest, sin causes the ruin of the wicked. 

Pro 13:7 There are some who, on nothing, pretend to be rich, some, with great wealth, pretend to be poor. 

Pro 13:8 The ransom for life is a person’s wealth; but the poor will not hear the reproof. 

Pro 1 3:9 The light of the upright is joyful, the lamp of the wicked goes out. 

Pro 13:10 Insolence breeds only disputes, wisdom lies with those who take advice. 

Pro 13:1 1 A sudden fortune will dwindle away, accumulation little by little is the way to riches. 

Pro 13:12 Hope deferred makes the heart sick, desire fulfilled is a tree of life. 

Pro 13:13 Contempt for the word is self-destructive, respect for the commandment wins salvation. 

Pro 13:14 The teaching of the wise is a life-giving fountain for eluding the snares of death. 

Pro 13:15 Good sense wins favour, but the way of the treacherous is hard. 

Pro 13:16 Anyone of discretion acts by the light of knowledge, the fool parades his folly. 

Pro 13:17 A bad messenger falls into misfortune, a trusty messenger brings healing. 

Pro 13:18 Whoëver rejects discipline wins poverty and scorn; for anyone who accepts correction: honour. 

Pro 13:19 Desire fulfilled is sweet to the soul; fools are loth to turn — from evil. 

Pro 1 3:20 Whoëver walks with the wise becomes wise, whoëver mixes with fools will be ruined. 

Pro 13:21 Evil will pursue the sinner, but good will reward the upright. 

Pro 1 3:22 The good bequeaths a heritage to children’s children, the wealth of the sinner is stored away for the 
upright. 

Pro 13:23 Though the farms of the poor yield much food, some perish for lack of justice. 



Pro 13:24 Whoëver fails to use the stick hates his child; whoëver is free with correction loves him. 

Pro 1 3:25 The upright eats to the full, the belly of the wicked goes empty. 

Pro 14:1 Wisdom builds herself a house; with her own hands Folly pulls it down. 

Pro 14:2 Whoëver keeps to an honest course fears Yahweh, whoëver deserts his paths shows contempt for 
him. 

Pro 14:3 Pride sprouts in the mouth of the fool, the lips of the wise keep them safe. 

Pro 14:4 No oxen, empty manger; strong bull, much cash. 

Pro 14:5 The truthful witness tells no lies, the false witness lies with every breath. 

Pro 14:6 In vain the mocker looks for wisdom, knowledge comes easy to the intelligent. 

Pro 14:7 Keep well clear of the fool, you will not find wise lips there. 

Pro 14:8 With people of discretion, wisdom keeps a watch over their conduct, but the folly of fools leads them 
astray. 

Pro 14:9 Fools mock at the sacrifice for sin, but favour resides among the honest. 

Pro 14:10 The heart knows its own grief best, nor can a stranger share its joy. 

Pro 14:11 The house of the wicked will be destroyed, the tent of the honest will prosper. 

Pro 14:12 There are ways that some think straight, but they lead in the end to death. 

Pro 14:13 Even in laughter the heart finds sadness, and joy makes way for sorrow. 

Pro 14:14 The miscreant will reap the reward of his conduct, and the good the reward of his deeds. 

Pro 14:15 The simpleton believes any message, a person of discretion treads a careful path. 

Pro 14:16 The wise fears evil and avoids it, the fool is insolent and conceited. 

Pro 14:17 A quick-tempered person commits rash acts, but a schemer is detestable. 

Pro 14:18 Simpletons have folly for their portion, people of discretion knowledge for their crown. 

Pro 14:19 The evil bow down before the good, the wicked, at the gates of the upright. 

Pro 14:20 The poor is detestable even to a friend, but many are they who love someöne rich. 

Pro 14:21 One who despises the needy is at fault, one who takes pity on the poor is blessed. 

Pro 14:22 Plan evil — isn’t this to go astray? Those who plan for good can earn faithful love and constancy. 

Pro 14:23 Hard work always yields its profit, idle talk brings only want. 

Pro 14:24 The crown of the wise is their riches; the folly of fools is folly. 

Pro 14:25 A truthful witness saves lives, whoëver utters lies is a deceiver. 

Pro 14:26 In the fear of Yahweh is powerful security; for his children he is a refuge. 

Pro 14:27 The fear of Yahweh is a life-giving spring for eluding the snares of death. 

Pro 14:28 Large population, monarch’s glory; dwindling population, ruler’s ruin. 

Pro 14:29 Mastery of temper is high proof of intelligence, a quick temper makes folly worse than ever. 

Pro 14:30 The life of the body is a tranquil heart, but envy is a cancer in the bones. 

Pro 14:31 To oppress the weak insults the Creator, kindness to the needy honours the Creator. 

Pro 14:32 For evil-doing, the wicked will be flung headlong, but in integrity the upright will find refuge. 

Pro 14:33 Wisdom resides in an understanding heart; she is not to be found in the hearts of fools. 

Pro 14:34 Uprightness makes a nation great, by sin whole races are disgraced. 

Pro 14:35 A king shows favour to a wise minister, but anger to one who shames him. 

Pro 15:1 A mild answer turns away wrath, sharp words stir up anger. 

Pro 15:2 The tongue of the wise makes knowledge welcome, the mouth of a fool spews folly. 

Pro 15:3 The eyes of Yahweh are everywhere: observing the wicked and the good. 

Pro 15:4 The tongue that soothes is a tree of life; the perverse tongue, a breaker of hearts. 

Pro 15:5 Only a fool spurns a father’s discipline, whoëver accepts correction is discreet. 

Pro 1 5:6 In the house of the upright there is no lack of treasure, the earnings of the wicked are fraught with 
anxiety. 

Pro 15:7 The lips of the wise spread knowledge, not so the hearts of fools. 

Pro 1 5:8 The sacrifice of the wicked is abhorrent to Yahweh, dear to him is the prayer of the honest. 

Pro 15:9 The conduct of the wicked is abhorrent to Yahweh, but he loves the person whose goal is uprightness. 
Pro 15:10 Correction is severe for one who leaves the way; whoëver hates being reprimanded will die. 

Pro 15:11 Sheol and Perdition lie open to Yahweh; how much more the human heart! 

Pro 15:12 The mocker does not care to be reprimanded, and will not choose the wise as companions. 

Pro 15:13 Glad heart means happy face, where the heart is sad the spirit is broken. 

Pro 15:14 The heart of the wise seeks knowledge, a fool’s mouth feeds on folly. 

Pro 15:15 For the poor every day is evil, for the joyous heart it is always festival time. 

Pro 15:16 Better to have little and with it fear of Yahweh than immense wealth and with it anxiety. 

Pro 15:17 Better a dish of herbs when love is there than a fattened ox and hatred to go with it. 

Pro 15:18 The hot-headed provokes disputes, the equable allays dissension. 

Pro 15:19 The way of the lazy is like a thorny hedge, the path of the honest is a broad highway. 



Pro 15:20 A wise child is a father’s joy; only a brute despises his mother. 

Pro 15:21 Folly appeals to someöne without sense, a person of understanding goes straight forward. 

Pro 15:22 Without deliberation plans come to nothing. Plans succeed where counsellors are many. 

Pro 15:23 Anyone who has a ready answer has joy too: how satisfying is the apt reply! 

Pro 1 5:24 For the prudent, the path of life leads upwards thus avoiding Sheol below. 

Pro 15:25 Yahweh pulls down the house of the proud, but he keeps the widow’s boundaries intact. 

Pro 1 5:26 Wicked scheming is abhorrent to Yahweh, but words that are kind are pure. 

Pro 15:27 Craving for dishonest gain brings trouble on a house, hatred of bribery earns life. 

Pro 15:28 The heart of the upright reflects before answering, the mouth of the wicked spews out wickedness. 
Pro 15:29 Yahweh keeps his distance from the wicked, but he listens to the prayers of the upright. 

Pro 1 5:30 A kindly glance gives joy to the heart, good news lends strength to the bones. 

Pro 1 5:31 The ear attentive to wholesome correction finds itself at home in the company of the wise. 

Pro 15:32 Whoëver rejects correction lacks self-respect, whoëver accepts reproof grows in understanding. 
Pro 15:33 The fear of Yahweh is a school of wisdom, before there can be glory, there must be humility. 

Pro 16:1 A human heart makes the plans, Yahweh gives the answer. 

Pro 16:2 A person’s own acts seem right to the doer, but Yahweh is the weigher of souls. 

Pro 16:3 Commend what you do to Yahweh, and what you plan will be achieved. 

Pro 16:4 Yahweh made everything for its own purpose, yes, even the wicked for the day of disaster. 

Pro 16:5 Every arrogant heart is abhorrent to Yahweh: be sure this will not go unpunished. 

Pro 16:6 By faithful love and constancy sin is expiated; by fear of Yahweh evil is avoided. 

Pro 16:7 Let Yahweh be pleased with someone’s way of life and he makes that person’s very enemies into 
friends. 

Pro 16:8 Better have little and with it uprightness than great revenues with injustice. 

Pro 16:9 The human heart may plan a course, but it is Yahweh who makes the steps secure. 

Pro 16:10 The lips of the king utter prophecies, he keeps faith when he speaks in judgement. 

Pro 16:1 1 The balances and scales belong to Yahweh, all the weights in the bag are of his making. 

Pro 16:12 Evil-doing is abhorrent to kings, since uprightness is a throne’s foundation. 

Pro 16:13 Upright lips are welcome to a king, he loves someöne of honest words. 

Pro 16:14 The king’s wrath is the herald of death, but the wise will appease it. 

Pro 16:15 When the king’s face brightens it spells life, his favour is like the rain in spring. 

Pro 16:16 Better gain wisdom than gold, choose understanding in preference to silver. 

Pro 16:17 To turn from evil is the way of the honest; whoëver watches the path keeps life safe. 

Pro 16:18 Pride goes before destruction, a haughty spirit before a fall. 

Pro 16:19 Better be humble with the poor than share the booty with the proud. 

Pro 16:20 Whoëver listens closely to the word finds happiness; whoëver trusts Yahweh is blessed. 

Pro 16:21 The wise of heart is acclaimed as intelligent, sweetness of speech increases knowledge. 

Pro 16:22 Shrewdness is a fountain of life for its possessor, the folly of fools is their own punishment. 

Pro 16:23 The heart of the wise lends shrewdness to speech and makes words more persuasive. 

Pro 16:24 Kindly words are a honeycomb, sweet to the taste, wholesome to the body. 

Pro 16:25 There is a way that some think straight, but it leads in the end to death. 

Pro 16:26 A worker’s appetite works on his behalf, for his hunger urges him on. 

Pro 16:27 A worthless person concocts evil, such a one’s talk is like a scorching fire. 

Pro 16:28 A troublemaker sows strife, a slanderer divides friend from friend. 

Pro 16:29 The violent lures his neighbour astray and leads him by a way that is not good. 

Pro 16:30 Whoëver narrows the eyes to think up tricks and purses the lips has already done wrong. 

Pro 16:31 White hairs are a crown of honour, they are found in the ways of uprightness. 

Pro 16:32 Better an equable person than a hero, someöne with self-mastery than one who takes a city. 

Pro 16:33 In the fold of the garment the lot is thrown, but from Yahweh comes the decision. 

Pro 17:1 Better a mouthful of dry bread with peace than a house filled with quarrelsome sacrifices. 

Pro 17:2 A shrewd servant comes off better than an unworthy child, he will share the inheritance with the 
brothers. 

Pro 17:3 A furnace for silver, a foundry for gold, but Yahweh for the testing of hearts! 

Pro 17:4 An evil-doer pays heed to malicious talk, a liar listens to a slanderous tongue. 

Pro 17:5 To mock the poor is to insult the Creator, no one who laughs at distress will go unpunished. 

Pro 17:6 The crown of the aged is their children’s children; the children’s glory is their father. 

Pro 17:7 Fine words do not become the foolish, false words become a prince still less. 

Pro 17:8 A gift works like a talisman for one who holds it: it brings prosperity at every turn. 

Pro 17:9 Whoëver covers an offence promotes love, whoëver again raises the matter divides friends. 

Pro 17:10 A reproof makes more impression on a person of understanding than a hundred strokes on a fool. 



Pro 17:1 1 The wicked person thinks of nothing but rebellion, but a cruel messenger will be sent to such a one. 
Pro 17:12 Rather come on a bear robbed of her cubs than on a fool in his folly. 

Pro 17:13 Disaster will never be far from the house of one who returns evil for good. 

Pro 17:14 As well unleash a flood as start a dispute; desist before the quarrel breaks out. 

Pro 17:15 To absolve the guilty and condemn the upright, both alike are abhorrent to Yahweh. 

Pro 17:16 What good is money in the hand of a fool? To buy wisdom with it? The desire is not there. 

Pro 17:17 A friend is a friend at all times, it is for adversity that a brother is born. 

Pro 17:18 Whoëver offers guarantees lacks sense and goes surety for a neighbour. 

Pro 17:19 The double-dealer loves sin, the proud courts ruin. 

Pro 17:20 The tortuous of heart finds no happiness, the perverse of speech falls into misery. 

Pro 17:21 He who fathers a stupid child does so to his sorrow, the father of a fool knows no joy. 

Pro 17:22 A glad heart is excellent medicine, a depressed spirit wastes the bones away. 

Pro 17:23 Under cover of his cloak a bad man takes a gift to pervert the course of justice. 

Pro 17:24 The intelligent has wisdom there before him, but the eyes of a fool range to the ends of the earth. 

Pro 17:25 A foolish child is a father’s sorrow, and the grief of her who gave the child birth. 

Pro 17:26 To fine the upright is indeed a crime, to strike the noble is an injustice. 

Pro 17:27 Whoëver can control the tongue knows what knowledge is, someöne of understanding keeps a cool 
temper. 

Pro 17:28 If the fool holds his tongue, he may pass for wise; if he seals his lips, he may pass for intelligent. 

Pro 18:1 Whoëver lives alone follows private whims, and is angered by advice of any kind. 

Pro 18:2 A fool takes no pleasure in understanding but only in airing an opinion. 

Pro 18:3 When wickedness comes, indignity comes too, and, with contempt, dishonour. 

Pro 18:4 Deep waters, such are human words: a gushing stream, the utterance of wisdom. 

Pro 1 8:5 It is not good to show partiality for the wicked and so to deprive the upright when giving judgement. 

Pro 18:6 The lips of a fool go to the law-courts with a mouth that pleads for a beating. 

Pro 18:7 The mouth of the fool works its owner’s ruin, the lips of a fool are a snare for their owner’s life. 

Pro 18:8 The words of a slanderer are tasty morsels that go right down into the belly. 

Pro 18:9 Whoëver is idle at work is blood-brother to the destroyer. 

Pro 18:10 The name of Yahweh is a strong tower; the upright runs to it and is secure. 

Pro 18:1 1 The wealth of the rich forms a stronghold, a high wall, as the rich supposes. 

Pro 18:12 The human heart is haughty until destruction comes, before there can be glory there must be humility. 
Pro 18:13 To retort without first listening is both foolish and embarrassing. 

Pro 18:14 Sickness the human spirit can endure, but when the spirit is broken, who can bear this? 

Pro 18:15 The heart of the intelligent acquires learning, the ears of the wise search for knowledge. 

Pro 18:16 A present will open all doors and win access to the great. 

Pro 18:17 The first to plead is adjudged to be upright, until the next comes and cross-examines him. 

Pro 18:18 The lot puts an end to disputes and decides between men of power. 

Pro 18:19 A brother offended is worse than a fortified city, and quarrels are like the locks of a keep. 

Pro 18:20 From the fruit of the mouth is a stomach filled, it is the yield of the lips that gives contentment. 

Pro 1 8:21 Death and life are in the gift of the tongue, those who indulge it must eat the fruit it yields. 

Pro 1 8:22 He who finds a wife finds happiness, receiving a mark of favour from Yahweh. 

Pro 1 8:23 The language of the poor is entreaty, the answer of the rich harshness. 

Pro 18:24 There are friends who point the way to ruin, others are closer than a brother. 

Pro 19:1 Better the poor living an honest life than the adept at double-talk who is a fool. 

Pro 19:2 Where knowledge is wanting, zeal is not good; whoëver goes too quickly stumbles. 

Pro 1 9:3 Folly leads conduct astray, yet it is against Yahweh that the heart rages. 

Pro 19:4 Wealth multiplies friends, but the one friend the poor has is taken away. 

Pro 19:5 The false witness will not go unpunished, no one who utters lies will go free. 

Pro 19:6 The nobleman has many to court his favour, to a giver of gifts, everyone is friend. 

Pro 19:7 The poor man’s brothers hate him, every one; his friends — how much the more do these desert him! 
He goes in search of words, but there are none to be had. 

Pro 19:8 Whoëver acquires sense wins profit from it, whoëver treasures understanding finds happiness. 

Pro 19:9 The false witness will not go unpunished, whoëver utters lies will be destroyed. 

Pro 19:10 It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury, still less for a slave to govern princes. 

Pro 19:1 1 Good sense makes for self-control, and for pride in overlooking an offence. 

Pro 19:12 Like the roaring of a lion, the anger of a king, but like dew on the grass his favour. 

Pro 19:13 A foolish child is a disaster for the father, the bickerings of a wife are like an ever-dripping gutter. 

Pro 19:14 From fathers comes inheritance of house and wealth, from Yahweh a wife who is discreet. 

Pro 19:15 Idleness lulls to sleep, the feckless soul will go hungry. 



Pro 19:16 Keeping the commandment is self-preservation, but whoëver despises these ways will die. 

Pro 19:17 Whoëver is kind to the poor is lending to Yahweh who will repay him the kindness done. 

Pro 19:18 While there is hope for him, chastise your child, but do not get so angry as to kill him. 

Pro 19:19 The violent lays himself open to a penalty; spare him, and you aggravate his crime. 

Pro 19:20 Listen to advice, accept correction, to be the wiser in the time to come. 

Pro 19:21 Many are the plans in the human heart, but the purpose of Yahweh — that stands firm. 

Pro 19:22 Faithful love is what people look for in a person; they prefer the poor to a liar. 

Pro 1 9:23 The fear of Yahweh leads to life, it brings food and shelter, without fear of evil. 

Pro 19:24 Into the dish the idler dips his hand, but bring it back to his mouth he cannot. 

Pro 19:25 Strike a cynic, and simpletons will be more wary; reprove the intelligent and he will understand your 
meaning. 

Pro 19:26 He who ill-treats his father and drives out his mother is a child both worthless and depraved. 

Pro 19:27 Give up listening to instruction, my child, if you mean to stray from words of knowledge. 

Pro 19:28 A perjured witness holds the law in scorn; the mouth of the wicked feasts on evil-doing. 

Pro 1 9:29 Punishments were made for mockers, and beating for the backs of fools. 

Pro 20:1 Wine is reckless, liquor rowdy; unwise is anyone whom it seduces. 

Pro 20:2 Like the roaring of a lion is the fury of a king; whoëver provokes him sins against himself. 

Pro 20:3 It is praiseworthy to stop short of a law-suit; only a fool flies into a rage. 

Pro 20:4 In autumn the idler does not plough, at harvest time he looks — nothing there! 

Pro 20:5 The resources of the human heart are like deep waters: an understanding person has only to draw on 
them. 

Pro 20:6 Many describe themselves as people of faithful love, but who can find someöne really to be trusted? 
Pro 20:7 The upright whose ways are blameless — blessed the children who come after! 

Pro 20:8 A king enthroned on the judgement seat with one look scatters all that is evil. 

Pro 20:9 Who can say, “I have cleansed my heart, I am purified of my sin 1 ? 

Pro 20:10 One weight here, another there; here one measure, there another: both alike are abhorrent to 
Yahweh. 

Pro 20:1 1 A young man’s character appears in what he does, if his behaviour is pure and straight. 

Pro 20:12 Ear that hears, eye that sees, Yahweh has made both of these. 

Pro 20:13 Do not love sleep or you will know poverty; keep your eyes open and have your fill of food. 

Pro 20:14 “No good, no good!”. says the buyer, but he goes off congratulating himself. 

Pro 20:15 There are gold and jewels of every type, but a priceless ornament is speech informed by knowledge. 
Pro 20:16 Take the man’s clothes! He has gone surety for a stranger. Take a pledge from him to the profit of 
persons unknown! 

Pro 20:17 Bread is sweet when it is got by fraud, but later the mouth is full of grit. 

Pro 20:18 Plans are matured by consultation; take wise advice when waging war. 

Pro 20:19 The bearer of gossip lets out secrets; do not mingle with chatterers. 

Pro 20:20 Whoëver curses father or mother will have his lamp put out in the deepest darkness. 

Pro 20:21 Property quickly come by at first will not be blessed in the end. 

Pro 20:22 Do not say, “I shall repay evil”; put your hope in Yahweh and he will keep you safe. 

Pro 20:23 One weight here, another there: this is abhorrent to Yahweh, false scales are not good. 

Pro 20:24 Yahweh guides the steps of the powerful: but who can comprehend human ways? 

Pro 20:25 Anyone is trapped who cries “Dedicated!”. and begins to reflect only after the vow. 

Pro 20:26 A wise king winnows the wicked and makes the wheel pass over them. 

Pro 20:27 The human spirit is the lamp of Yahweh — searching the deepest self. 

Pro 20:28 Faithful love and loyalty mount guard over the king, his throne is founded on saving justice. 

Pro 20:29 The pride of the young is their strength, the ornament of the old, grey hairs. 

Pro 20:30 Wounding strokes are good medicine for evil, blows have an effect on the inmost self. 

Pro 21:1 Like flowing water is a king’s heart in Yahweh’s hand; he directs it wherever he pleases. 

Pro 21 :2 All actions are straight in the doer’s own eyes, but it is Yahweh who weighs hearts. 

Pro 21 :3 To do what is upright and just is more pleasing to Yahweh than sacrifice. 

Pro 21 :4 Haughty eye, proud heart, lamp of the wicked, nothing but sin. 

Pro 21 :5 The hardworking is thoughtful, and all is gain; too much haste, and all that comes of it is want. 

Pro 21 :6 To make a fortune with the help of a lying tongue: such is the idle fantasy of those who look for death. 
Pro 21 :7 The violence of the wicked proves their ruin, for they refuse to do what is right. 

Pro 21 :8 The way of the felon is devious, the conduct of the innocent straight. 

Pro 21 :9 Better the corner of a roof to live on than a house shared with a quarrelsome woman. 

Pro 21:10 The soul of the wicked is intent on evil, to such a person no neighbour can ever do right. 

Pro 21:11 When a cynic is punished, simpletons grow wiser, but someöne of understanding acquires knowledge 



by instruction. 

Pro 21:12 The Upright One watches the house of the wicked; he hurls the wicked to destruction. 

Pro 21:13 Whoëver refuses to listen to the cry of the weak, will in turn plead and not be heard. 

Pro 21:14 Anger is mollified by a covert gift, raging fury by a present under cover of the cloak. 

Pro 21:15 Doing what is right fills the upright with joy, but evil-doers with terror. 

Pro 21:16 Whoëver strays far from the way of prudence will rest in the assembly of shadows. 

Pro 21:17 Pleasure-lovers stay poor, no one will grow rich who loves wine and good living. 

Pro 21:18 The wicked is a ransom for the upright; and the law-breaker for the honest. 

Pro 21:19 Better to live in a desert land than with a quarrelsome and irritable woman. 

Pro 21 :20 The wise has valuables and oil at home, but a fool soon runs through both. 

Pro 21 :21 Whoëver pursues uprightness and faithful love will find life, uprightness and honour. 

Pro 21 :22 A sage can scale a garrisoned city and shatter the rampart on which it relied. 

Pro 21 :23 Watch kept over mouth and tongue keeps the watcher safe from disaster. 

Pro 21 :24 Insolent, haughty — the name is “Cynic”; overweening pride marks such behaviour. 

Pro 21 :25 The idler’s desires are the death of him, since his hands will do no work. 

Pro 21 :26 All day long the godless is racked by desire, the upright gives without ever refusing. 

Pro 21 .21 The sacrifice of the wicked is abhorrent, above all if it is offered for bad motives. 

Pro 21 :28 The false witness will perish, but no one who knows how to listen will ever be silenced. 

Pro 21 :29 The wicked man’s strength shows on his face, but the honest it is whose steps are firm. 

Pro 21 :30 No wisdom, no understanding, no advice is worth anything before Yahweh. 

Pro 21 :31 Fit out the cavalry for the day of battle, but the victory is Yahweh’s. 

Pro 22:1 Fame is preferable to great wealth, favour, to silver and gold. 

Pro 22:2 Rich and poor rub shoulders, Yahweh has made them both. 

Pro 22:3 The discreet sees danger and takes shelter, simpletons go ahead and pay the penalty. 

Pro 22:4 The reward of humility is the fear of Yahweh, and riches, honour and life. 

Pro 22:5 Thorns and snares line the path of the wilful, whoëver values life will stay at a distance. 

Pro 22:6 Give a lad a training suitable to his character and, even when old, he will not go back on it. 

Pro 22:7 The rich lords it over the poor, the borrower is the lender’s slave. 

Pro 22:8 Whoëver sows injustice reaps disaster, and the rod of such anger will disappear. 

Pro 22:9 A kindly eye will earn a blessing, such a person shares out food with the poor. 

Pro 22:10 Expel the mocker and strife goes too, law-suits and dislike die down. 

Pro 22:1 1 Whoëver loves the pure of heart and is gracious of speech has the king for a friend. 

Pro 22:12 Yahweh’s eyes protect knowledge, but he confounds deceitful speeches. 

Pro 22:13 “There is a lion outside”, says the idler, “I shall be killed in the street!”. 

Pro 22:14 The mouth of an adulterous woman is a deep pit, into it falls the man whom Yahweh rebukes. 

Pro 22:15 Folly is anchored in the heart of a youth, the whip of instruction will rid him of it. 

Pro 22:16 Harsh treatment enriches the poor, but a gift impoverishes the rich. 

Pro 22:17 Give ear, listen to the sayings of the sages, and apply your heart to what I know, 

Pro 22:18 for it will be a delight to keep them deep within you to have them all ready on your lips. 

Pro 22:19 So that your trust may be in Yahweh, it is you whom I wish to instruct today. 

Pro 22:20 Have I not written for you thirty chapters of advice and knowledge, 

Pro 22:21 to make you know the certainty of true sayings, so that you can return with sound answers to those 
who sent you? 

Pro 22:22 Do not despoil the weak, for he is weak, and do not oppress the poor at the gate, 

Pro 22:23 for Yahweh takes up their cause, and extorts the life of their extortioners. 

Pro 22:24 Do not make friends with one who gives way to anger, make no one quick-tempered a companion of 
yours, 

Pro 22:25 for fear you learn such behaviour and in it find a snare for yourself. 

Pro 22:26 Do not be one of those who go guarantor, who go surety for debts: 

Pro 22:27 if you have no means of paying your bed will be taken from under you. 

Pro 22:28 Do not displace the ancient boundary-stone set by your ancestors. 

Pro 22:29 You see someöne alert at his business? His aim will be to serve kings; not for him the service of the 
obscure. 

Pro 23:1 If you take your seat at a great man’s table, take careful note of what you have before you; 

Pro 23:2 if you have a big appetite put a knife to your throat. 

Pro 23:3 Do not hanker for his delicacies, for they are deceptive food. 

Pro 23:4 Do not wear yourself out in quest of wealth, stop applying your mind to this. 

Pro 23:5 Fix your gaze on it, and it is there no longer, for it is able to sprout wings like an eagle that flies off to 
the sky. 



Pro 23:6 Do not eat the food of anyone whose eye is jealous, do not hanker for his delicacies. 

Pro 23:7 For what he is really thinking about is himself: “Eat and drink”, he tells you, but his heart is not with you. 
Pro 23:8 You will spit out whatever you have eaten and find your compliments wasted. 

Pro 23:9 Do not waste words on a fool, who will not appreciate the shrewdness of your remarks. 

Pro 23:10 Do not displace the ancient boundary-stone, or encroach on orphans’ lands, 

Pro 23:1 1 for they have a powerful avenger, and he will take up their cause against you. 

Pro 23:12 Apply your heart to discipline, and your ears to instructive sayings. 

Pro 23:13 Do not be chary of correcting a child, a stroke of the cane is not likely to be fatal. 

Pro 23:14 Give him a stroke of the cane, you will save his soul from Sheol. 

Pro 23:15 My child, if your heart is wise, then my own heart is glad, 

Pro 23:16 and my inmost self rejoices when from your lips come honest words. 

Pro 23:17 Do not let your heart be envious of sinners but remain steady every day in the fear of Yahweh; 

Pro 23:18 for there is a future, and your hope will not come to nothing. 

Pro 23:19 Listen, my child, and be wise, and guide your heart in the way. 

Pro 23:20 Do not be one of those forever tippling wine nor one of those who gorge themselves with meat; 

Pro 23:21 for the drunkard and glutton impoverish themselves, and sleepiness is clothed in rags. 

Pro 23:22 Listen to your father from whom you are sprung, do not despise your mother in her old age. 

Pro 23:23 Purchase truth — never sell it-wisdom, discipline, and discernment. 

Pro 23:24 The father of the upright will rejoice indeed, he who fathers a wise child will have joy of it. 

Pro 23:25 Your father and mother will be happy, and she who bore you joyful. 

Pro 23:26 My child, pay attention to me, let your eyes take pleasure in my way: 

Pro 23:27 a prostitute is a deep pit, a narrow well, the woman who belongs to another. 

Pro 23:28 Yes, like a brigand, she lies in wait, increasing the number of law-breakers. 

Pro 23:29 For whom is pity, for whom contempt, for whom is strife, for whom complaint, for whom blows struck 
at random, for whom the clouded eye? 

Pro 23:30 For those who linger over wine too long, ever on the look-out for the blended liquors. 

Pro 23:31 Do not gaze at wine, how red it is, how it sparkles in the cup! How smoothly it slips down the throat! 
Pro 23:32 In the end its bite is like a serpent’s, its sting as sharp as an adder’s. 

Pro 23:33 Your eyes will see peculiar things, you will talk nonsense from your heart. 

Pro 23:34 You will be like someöne sleeping in mid-ocean, like one asleep at the mast-head. 

Pro 23:35 “Struck me, have they? But I'm not hurt. Beaten me? I don’t feel anything. When shall I wake up? . . I'll 
ask for more of it!”. 

Pro 24:1 Do not be envious of the wicked or wish for their company, 

Pro 24:2 for their hearts are scheming violence, their lips talking mischief. 

Pro 24:3 By wisdom a house is built, by understanding it is made strong; 

Pro 24:4 by knowledge its storerooms are filled with riches of every kind, rare and desirable. 

Pro 24:5 The wise is mighty in power, strength is reinforced by science; 

Pro 24:6 for it is by strategy that you wage war, and victory depends on having many counsellors. 

Pro 24:7 For a fool wisdom is an inaccessible fortress: at the city gate he does not open his mouth. 

Pro 24:8 Anyone intent on evil-doing is known as a master in cunning. 

Pro 24:9 Folly dreams of nothing but sin, the mocker is abhorrent. 

Pro 24:10 If you lose heart when things go wrong, your strength is not worth much. 

Pro 24:1 1 Save those being dragged towards death, but can you rescue those on their way to execution? 

Pro 24:12 If you say, “But look, we did not know”, will the Weigher of the heart pay no attention? Will not the 
Guardian of your soul be aware and repay you as your deeds deserve? 

Pro 24:13 Eat honey, my child, since it is good; honey that drips from the comb is sweet to the taste: 

Pro 24:14 and so, for sure, will wisdom be to your soul: find it and you will have a future and your hope will not 
be cut short. 

Pro 24:15 Do not lurk, wicked man, round the upright man’s dwelling, do not despoil his house. 

Pro 24:16 For though the upright falls seven times, he gets up again; the wicked are the ones who stumble in 
adversity. 

Pro 24:17 Should your enemy fall, do not rejoice, when he stumbles do not let your heart exult: 

Pro 24:18 for fear that Yahweh will be displeased at the sight and turn his anger away from him. 

Pro 24:19 Do not be indignant about the wicked, do not be envious of the evil, 

Pro 24:20 for there is no future for the evil, the lamp of the wicked will go out. 

Pro 24:21 Fear Yahweh, my child, and fear the king; do not ally yourself with innovators; 

Pro 24:22 for suddenly disaster will loom for them, and who knows what ruin will seize them and their friends? 
Pro 24:23 The following are also taken from the sages: To show partiality in judgement is not good. 

Pro 24:24 Whoëver tells the wicked, “You are upright”, peoples curse him, nations revile him; 



Pro 24:25 but those who correct him, come out of it well, on them will come a happy blessing. 

Pro 24:26 Whoëver returns an honest answer, plants a kiss on the lips. 

Pro 24:27 Plan what you want on the open ground, make your preparation in the field; then go and build your 
house. 

Pro 24:28 Do not bear witness lightly against your neighbour, nor deceive with your lips. 

Pro 24:29 Do not say, “I will treat my neighbour as my neighbour treated me; I will repay everyone what each 
has earned”. 

Pro 24:30 By the idler’s field I was passing, by the vineyard of a man who had no sense, 

Pro 24:31 there it all lay, deep in thorns, entirely overgrown with weeds, and its stone wall broken down. 

Pro 24:32 And as I gazed I pondered, I drew this lesson from the sight, 

Pro 24:33 “A little sleep, a little drowsiness, a little folding of the arms to lie back 
Pro 24:34 and poverty comes like a vagrant, and, like a beggar, dearth”. 

Pro 25:1 Here are some more of Solomon’s proverbs, transcribed at the court of Hezekiah king of Judah: 

Pro 25:2 To conceal a matter, this is the glory of God, to sift it thoroughly, the glory of kings. 

Pro 25:3 The heavens for height and the earth for depth, unfathomable, as are the hearts of kings. 

Pro 25:4 From silver remove the dross and it emerges wholly purified; 

Pro 25:5 from the king’s presence remove the wicked and on uprightness his throne is founded. 

Pro 25:6 In the presence of the king do not give yourself airs, do not take a place among the great; 

Pro 25:7 better to be invited, “Come up here”, than be humiliated in the presence of the prince. 

Pro 25:8 What your eyes have witnessed do not produce too quickly at the trial, for what are you to do at the 
end should your neighbour confute you? 

Pro 25:9 Have the quarrel out with your neighbour, but do not disclose another’s secret, 

Pro 25:10 for fear your listener put you to shame, and the loss of repute be irremediable. 

Pro 25:1 1 Like apples of gold inlaid with silver is a word that is aptly spoken. 

Pro 25:12 A golden ring, an ornament of finest gold, is a wise rebuke to an attentive ear. 

Pro 25:13 The coolness of snow in harvest time, such is a trustworthy messenger to those who send him: he 
revives the soul of his master. 

Pro 25:14 Clouds and wind, but no rain: such is anyone whose promises are princely but never kept. 

Pro 25:15 With patience a judge may be cajoled: a soft tongue breaks bones. 

Pro 25:16 Eat to your satisfaction what honey you may find, but not to excess or you will bring it up again. 

Pro 25:17 Do not set foot too often in your neighbour’s house, for fear the neighbour tire of you and come to 
hate you. 

Pro 25:18 A mace, a sword, a piercing arrow, such is anyone who bears false witness against a companion. 

Pro 25:19 Decaying tooth, lame foot, such is the fickle when trusted in time of trouble: 

Pro 25:20 as well take off your coat in bitter weather. You are pouring vinegar on a wound when you sing songs 
to a sorrowing heart. 

Pro 25:21 If your enemy is hungry, give him something to eat; if thirsty, something to drink. 

Pro 25:22 By this you will be heaping red-hot coals on his head, and Yahweh will reward you. 

Pro 25:23 The north wind begets the rain, and a backbiting tongue, black looks. 

Pro 25:24 Better the corner of a roof to live on than a house shared with a quarrelsome woman. 

Pro 25:25 Cold water to a thirsty throat; such is good news from a distant land. 

Pro 25:26 A churned — up spring, a fountain fouled; such is the upright person trembling before the wicked. 

Pro 25:27 It is not good to eat too much honey, nor to seek for glory on top of glory. 

Pro 25:28 An open town, and without defences: such is anyone who lacks self-control. 

Pro 26:1 Snow no more befits the summer, nor rain the harvest-time, than honours befit a fool. 

Pro 26:2 As the sparrow escapes, and the swallow flies away, so the undeserved curse will never hit its mark. 
Pro 26:3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey, and for the backs of fools, a stick. 

Pro 26:4 Do not answer a fool in the terms of his folly for fear you grow like him yourself. 

Pro 26:5 Answer a fool in the terms of his folly for fear he imagine himself wise. 

Pro 26:6 He wounds himself, he takes violence for his drink, who sends a message by a fool. 

Pro 26:7 Unreliable as the legs of the lame, so is a proverb in the mouth of fools. 

Pro 26:8 As well tie the stone to the sling as pay honour to a fool. 

Pro 26:9 A thorn branch in a drunkard’s hand, such is a proverb in the mouth of fools. 

Pro 26:10 An archer wounding everyone, such is he who hires the passing fool and drunkard. 

Pro 26:1 1 As a dog returns to its vomit, so a fool reverts to his folly. 

Pro 26:12 You see someöne who thinks himself wise? More to be hoped for from a fool than from him! 

Pro 26:13 “A wild beast on the road!”. says the idler, “a lion in the streets!”. 

Pro 26:14 The door turns on its hinges, the idler on his bed. 

Pro 26:15 Into the dish the idler dips his hand, but is too tired to bring it back to his mouth. 



Pro 26:16 The idler thinks himself wiser than seven people who answer with discretion. 

Pro 26:17 He takes a stray dog by the ears, who meddles in someöne else’s quarrel. 

Pro 26:18 Like a madman hurling firebrands, arrows and death, 

Pro 26:19 so is anyone who lies to a companion and then says, “Aren’t I amusing?”. 

Pro 26:20 No wood, and the fire goes out; no slanderer, and quarrelling dies down. 

Pro 26:21 Charcoal for live embers, wood for fire, and the quarrelsome for kindling strife. 

Pro 26:22 The words of a slanderer are tasty morsels that go right down into the belly. 

Pro 26:23 Base silver-plate on top of clay: such are fervent lips and a wicked heart. 

Pro 26:24 Whoëver hates may hide it in speech, but deep within lies treachery; 

Pro 26:25 do not trust such a person’s pretty speeches, since in the heart lurk seven abominations. 

Pro 26:26 Hatred may disguise itself with guile, to reveal its wickedness later in the assembly. 

Pro 26:27 Whoëver digs a pit falls into it, the stone comes back on him that rolls it. 

Pro 26:28 The lying tongue hates its victims, the wheedling mouth causes ruin. 

Pro 27:1 Do not congratulate yourself about tomorrow, since you do not know what today will bring forth. 

Pro 27:2 Let someöne else sing your praises, but not your own mouth, a stranger, but not your own lips. 

Pro 27:3 Heavy is the stone, weighty is the sand; heavier than both — a grudge borne by a fool. 

Pro 27:4 Cruel is wrath, overwhelming is anger; but jealousy, who can withstand that? 

Pro 27:5 Better open reproof than feigned love. 

Pro 27:6 Trustworthy are blows from a friend, deceitful are kisses from a foe. 

Pro 27:7 The gorged throat revolts at honey, the hungry throat finds all bitterness sweet. 

Pro 27:8 Like a bird that strays from its nest, so is anyone who strays away from home. 

Pro 27:9 Oil and perfume gladden the heart, and the sweetness of friendship rather than self-reliance. 

Pro 27:10 Do not give up your friend or your father’s friend; when trouble comes, do not go off to your brother’s 
house, better a near neighbour than a distant brother. 

Pro 27:1 1 Learn to be wise, my child, and gladden my heart, that I may have an answer for anyone who insults 
me. 

Pro 27:12 The discreet sees danger and takes shelter, simpletons go ahead and pay the penalty. 

Pro 27:13 Take the man’s clothes! He has gone surety for a stranger. Take a pledge from him, for persons 
unknown. 

Pro 27:14 Whoëver at dawn loudly blesses his neighbour — it will be reckoned to him as a curse. 

Pro 27:15 The dripping of a gutter on a rainy day and a quarrelsome woman are alike; 

Pro 27:16 whoëver can restrain her, can restrain the wind, and take a firm hold on grease. 

Pro 27:17 Iron is sharpened by iron, one person is sharpened by contact with another. 

Pro 27:18 Whoëver tends the fig tree eats its figs, whoëver looks after his master will be honoured. 

Pro 27:19 As water reflects face back to face, so one human heart reflects another. 

Pro 27:20 Sheol and Perdition are never satisfied, insatiable, too, are human eyes. 

Pro 27:21 A furnace for silver, a foundry for gold: a person is worth what his reputation is worth. 

Pro 27:22 Pound a fool in a mortar, among grain with a pestle, his folly will not leave him. 

Pro 27:23 Know your flocks’ condition well, take good care of your herds; 

Pro 27:24 for riches do not last for ever, crowns do not hand themselves on from age to age. 

Pro 27:25 The grass once gone, the aftergrowth appearing, the hay gathered in from the mountains, 

Pro 27:26 you should have lambs to clothe you, goats to buy you a field, 

Pro 27:27 goat’s milk sufficient to feed you, to feed your household and provide for your serving girls. 

Pro 28:1 The wicked flees when no one is pursuing, the upright is bold as a lion. 

Pro 28:2 A country in revolt throws up many leaders: with one person wise and experienced, you have stability. 
Pro 28:3 The wicked oppresses the weak: here is a devastating rain — and farewell, bread! 

Pro 28:4 Those who forsake the law sing the praises of the wicked, those who observe the law are angered by 
them. 

Pro 28:5 The wicked do not know what justice means, those who seek Yahweh understand everything. 

Pro 28:6 Better someöne poor living an honest life than someöne of devious ways however rich. 

Pro 28:7 An intelligent child is one who keeps the Law; an associate of profligates brings shame on his father. 
Pro 28:8 Whoëver increases wealth by usury and interest amasses it for someöne else who will bestow it on the 
poor. 

Pro 28:9 Whoëver refuses to listen to the Law, such a one’s very prayer is an abomination. 

Pro 28:10 Whoëver seduces the honest to evil ways will fall into his own pit. The blameless are the heirs to 
happiness. 

Pro 28:1 1 The rich may think himself wise, but the intelligent poor will unmask him. 

Pro 28:12 When the upright triumph, there is great exultation: when the wicked are in the ascendant, people 
take cover. 



Pro 28:13 No one who conceals his sins will prosper, whoëver confesses and renounces them will find mercy. 
Pro 28:14 Blessed the person who is never without fear, whoëver hardens his heart will fall into distress. 

Pro 28:15 Like a roaring lion or a springing bear is a wicked ruler of a powerless people. 

Pro 28:16 An unenlightened ruler is rich in rapacity, one who hates greed will lengthen his days. 

Pro 28:17 A man guilty of murder will flee till he reaches his tomb: let no one halt him! 

Pro 28:18 Whoëver lives an honest life will be safe, whoëver wavers between two ways falls down in one of 
them. 

Pro 28:19 Whoëver works his land shall have bread and to spare, but no one who chases fantasies has any 
sense. 

Pro 28:20 A trustworthy person will be overwhelmed with blessings, but no one who tries to get rich quickly will 
go unpunished. 

Pro 28:21 It is not good to show partiality, but people will do wrong for a mouthful of bread. 

Pro 28:22 The person of greedy eye chases after wealth, not knowing that want will be the result. 

Pro 28:23 Anyone who reproves another will enjoy more favour in the end than the flatterer. 

Pro 28:24 Whoëver robs father and mother saying, “Nothing wrong in that!”. is comrade for a brigand. 

Pro 28:25 The covetous provokes disputes, whoëver trusts in Yahweh will prosper. 

Pro 28:26 Whoëver trusts his own wit is a fool, anyone whose ways are wise will be safe. 

Pro 28:27 No one who gives to the poor will ever go short, but whoëver closes his eyes will have curses in 
plenty. 

Pro 28:28 When the wicked are in the ascendant, people take cover, but when they perish, the upright multiply. 
Pro 29:1 Whoëver is stiff-necked under reproof will be suddenly and irremediably broken. 

Pro 29:2 When the upright are on the increase, the people rejoice; when the wicked are in power, the people 
groan. 

Pro 29:3 The lover of Wisdom makes his father glad, but the patron of prostitutes fritters his wealth away. 

Pro 29:4 A king gives a country stability by justice, an extortioner brings it to ruin. 

Pro 29:5 Whoëver flatters his companion spreads a net for his feet. 

Pro 29:6 In the sin of the wicked lies a snare, but the upright exults and rejoices. 

Pro 29:7 The upright understands the cause of the weak, the wicked has not the wit to understand it. 

Pro 29:8 Scoffers set a city in ferment, but the wise moderate anger. 

Pro 29:9 Let someöne wise argue with a fool, anger and good humour alike will be wasted. 

Pro 29:10 The bloodthirsty hate the honest, but the upright seek them out. 

Pro 29:1 1 The fool blurts out every angry feeling, but the wise subdues and restrains them. 

Pro 29:12 When a ruler listens to false reports, all his ministers will be scoundrels. 

Pro 29:13 Poor and oppressor are found together, Yahweh gives light to the eyes of both. 

Pro 29:14 The king who judges the weak with equity sees his throne set firm for ever. 

Pro 29:15 The stick and the reprimand bestow wisdom, a young man left to himself brings shame on his mother. 

Pro 29:16 When the wicked are on the increase, sin multiplies, but the upright will witness their downfall. 

Pro 29:17 Correct your child, and he will give you peace of mind; he will delight your soul. 

Pro 29:18 Where there is no vision the people get out of hand; happy are they who keep the law. 

Pro 29:19 Not by words is a slave corrected: even if he understands, he will take no notice. 

Pro 29:20 You see someöne too ready of speech? There is more to be hoped for from a fool! 

Pro 29:21 If a slave is pampered from childhood, he will prove ungrateful in the end. 

Pro 29:22 The hot-head provokes disputes, someöne in a rage commits all sorts of sins. 

Pro 29:23 Pride brings humiliation, whoëver humbles himself will win honour. 

Pro 29:24 To hear the curse and disclose nothing is to share with the thief and to hate oneself. 

Pro 29:25 To be afraid of human beings is a snare, whoëver trusts in Yahweh is secure. 

Pro 29:26 Many people seek a ruler’s favour, but the rights of each come from Yahweh. 

Pro 29:27 Abhorrent to the upright is the sinful, abhorrent to the wicked is one whose way is straight. 

Pro 30:1 The sayings of Agur son of Jakeh, of Massa. Prophecy of this man for Ithiel, for Ithiel and for Ucal. 

Pro 30:2 I am myself the stupidest of people, bereft of human intelligence, 

Pro 30:3 I have not learnt wisdom, and I lack the knowledge of the holy ones. 

Pro 30:4 Who has mounted to the heavens, then come down again? Who has gathered the wind in the clasp of 
his hand? Who has wrapped the waters in his cloak? Who has set all the ends of the earth firm? What is his 
name? What is his child’s name? Do you know? 

Pro 30:5 Every word of God is unalloyed, a shield to those who take refuge in him. 

Pro 30:6 To his words make no addition, lest he reprove you and account you a liar. 

Pro 30:7 Two things I beg of you, do not grudge me them before I die: 

Pro 30:8 keep falsehood and lies far from me, give me neither poverty nor riches, grant me only my share of 
food, 



Pro 30:9 for fear that, surrounded by plenty, I should fall away and say, “Yahweh-who is Yahweh?”. or else, in 
destitution, take to stealing and profane the name of my God. 

Pro 30:10 Do not blacken a slave’s name to his master, lest he curse you, and you suffer for it. 

Pro 30:1 1 There is a breed of person that curses his father and does not bless his mother; 

Pro 30:12 a breed that, laying claim to purity, has not yet been cleansed of its filth; 

Pro 30:13 a breed haughty of eye, with disdain in every glance; 

Pro 30:14 a breed with swords for teeth, with knives for jaws, devouring the oppressed from the earth and the 
needy from the land. 

Pro 30:15 The leech has two daughters: “Give! Give!”. There are three insatiable things, four, indeed, that never 
say, “Enough!”. 

Pro 30:16 Sheol, the barren womb, earth which can never have its fill of water, fire which never says, “Enough!”. 

Pro 30:17 The eye which looks jeeringly on a father, and scorns the obedience due to a mother, will be pecked 

out by the ravens of the valley, and eaten by the vultures. 

Pro 30:18 There are three things beyond my comprehension, four, indeed, that I do not understand: 

Pro 30:19 the way of an eagle through the skies, the way of a snake over the rock, the way of a ship in mid- 
ocean, the way of a man with a girl. 

Pro 30:20 This is how an adulteress behaves: she eats, then wipes her mouth and says, “I have done nothing 
wrong!”. 

Pro 30:21 There are three things at which the earth trembles, four, indeed, which it cannot endure: 

Pro 30:22 a slave become king, a brute gorged with food, 

Pro 30:23 a hateful woman wed at last, a servant girl inheriting from her mistress. 

Pro 30:24 There are four creatures little on the earth, though they are wisest of the wise: 

Pro 30:25 ants, a race with no strength, yet in the summer they make sure of their food; 

Pro 30:26 the coneys, a race without defences, yet they make their home in the rocks; 

Pro 30:27 locusts, which have no king, yet they all march in good order; 

Pro 30:28 lizards, which you can catch in your hand, yet they frequent the palaces of kings. 

Pro 30:29 There are three things of stately tread, four, indeed, of stately walk: 

Pro 30:30 the lion, bravest of beasts, he will draw back from nothing; 

Pro 30:31 a vigorous cock, a he-goat, and the king when he harangues his people. 

Pro 30:32 If you have been foolish enough to fly into a passion and now have second thoughts, lay your hand 
on your lips. 

Pro 30:33 For by churning the milk you produce butter, by wringing the nose you produce blood, and by 
whipping up anger you produce strife. 

Pro 31:1 The sayings of Lemuel king of Massa, taught him by his mother: 

Pro 31 :2 What, my son! What, son of my womb! What, son of my vows! 

Pro 31 :3 Do not expend your energy on women nor your wealth on those who ruin kings. 

Pro 31 :4 Not for kings, O Lemuel, not for kings the drinking of wine, not for princes the love of liquor, 

Pro 31 :5 for fear that in liquor they forget what they have decreed and pervert the course of justice against all 
the poor. 

Pro 31 :6 Procure strong drink for someöne about to die, wine for him whose heart is heavy: 

Pro 31 :7 let him drink and forget his misfortune, and remember his misery no more. 

Pro 31 :8 Make your views heard, on behalf of the dumb, on behalf of all the unwanted; 

Pro 31 :9 make your views heard, pronounce an upright verdict, defend the cause of the poor and the wretched. 
Pro 31:10 The truly capable woman — who can find her? She is far beyond the price of pearls. 

Pro 31:11 Her husband’s heart has confidence in her, from her he will derive no little profit. 

Pro 31:12 Advantage and not hurt she brings him all the days of her life. 

Pro 31:13 She selects wool and flax, she does her work with eager hands. 

Pro 31:14 She is like those merchant vessels, bringing her food from far away. 

Pro 31:15 She gets up while it is still dark giving her household their food, giving orders to her serving girls. 

Pro 31:16 She sets her mind on a field, then she buys it; with what her hands have earned she plants a 
vineyard. 

Pro 31:17 She puts her back into her work and shows how strong her arms can be. 

Pro 31:18 She knows that her affairs are going well; her lamp does not go out at night. 

Pro 31:19 She sets her hands to the distaff, her fingers grasp the spindle. 

Pro 31 :20 She holds out her hands to the poor, she opens her arms to the needy. 

Pro 31 :21 Snow may come, she has no fears for her household, with all her servants warmly clothed. 

Pro 31 :22 She makes her own quilts, she is dressed in fine linen and purple. 

Pro 31 :23 Her husband is respected at the city gates, taking his seat among the elders of the land. 

Pro 31 :24 She weaves materials and sells them, she supplies the merchant with sashes. 



Pro 31 :25 She is clothed in strength and dignity, she can laugh at the day to come. 

Pro 31 :26 When she opens her mouth, she does so wisely; on her tongue is kindly instruction. 

Pro 31 .21 She keeps good watch on the conduct of her household, no bread of idleness for her. 

Pro 31 :28 Her children stand up and proclaim her blessed, her husband, too, sings her praises: 

Pro 31 :29 “Many women have done admirable things, but you surpass them all!”. 

Pro 31 :30 Charm is deceitful, and beauty empty; the woman who fears Yahweh is the one to praise. 

Pro 31 :31 Give her a share in what her hands have worked for, and let her works tell her praises at the city 
gates. 

Ecc 1:1 Composition of Qoheleth son of David, king in Jerusalem. 

Ecc 1:2 Sheer futility, Qoheleth says. Sheer futility: everything is futile! 

Ecc 1 :3 What profit can we show for all our toil, toiling under the sun? 

Ecc 1 :4 A generation goes, a generation comes, yet the earth stands firm for ever. 

Ecc 1:5 The sun rises, the sun sets; then to its place it speeds and there it rises. 

Ecc 1:6 Southward goes the wind, then turns to the north; it turns and turns again; then back to its circling goes 
the wind. 

Ecc 1 :7 Into the sea go all the rivers, and yet the sea is never filled, and still to their goal the rivers go. 

Ecc 1 :8 All things are wearisome. No one can say that eyes have not had enough of seeing, ears their fill of 
hearing. 

Ecc 1 :9 What was, will be again, what has been done, will be done again, and there is nothing new under the 
sun! 

Ecc 1:10 Take anything which people acclaim as being new: it existed in the centuries preceding us. 

Ecc 1:11 No memory remains of the past, and so it will be for the centuries to come — they will not be 
remembered by their successors. 

Ecc 1:12 I, Qoheleth, have reigned over Israel in Jerusalem. 

Ecc 1:13 Wisely I have applied myself to investigation and exploration of everything that happens under heaven. 
What a wearisome task God has given humanity to keep us busy! 

Ecc 1:14 I have seen everything that is done under the sun: how futile it all is, mere chasing after the wind! 

Ecc 1:15 What is twisted cannot be straightened, what is not there cannot be counted. 

Ecc 1:16 I thought to myself: I have acquired a greater stock of wisdom than anyone before me in Jerusalem. I 
myself have mastered every kind of wisdom and science. 

Ecc 1:17 I have applied myself to understanding philosophy and science, stupidity and folly, and I now realise 
that all this too is chasing after the wind. 

Ecc 1:18 Much wisdom, much grief; the more knowledge, the more sorrow. 

Ecc 2:1 I thought to myself, “Very well, I will try pleasure and see what enjoyment has to offer”. And this was 
futile too. 

Ecc 2:2 This laughter, I reflected, is a madness, this pleasure no use at all. 

Ecc 2:3 I decided to hand my body over to drinking wine, my mind still guiding me in wisdom; I resolved to 
embrace folly, to discover the best way for people to spend their days under the sun. 

Ecc 2:4 I worked on a grand scale: built myself palaces, planted vineyards; 

Ecc 2:5 made myself gardens and orchards, planting every kind of fruit tree in them; 

Ecc 2:6 had pools made for watering the young trees of my plantations. 

Ecc 2:7 I bought slaves, male and female, had home-born slaves as well; herds and flocks I had too, more than 
anyone in Jerusalem before me. 

Ecc 2:8 I amassed silver and gold, the treasures of kings and provinces; acquired singers, men and women, 
and every human luxury, chest upon chest of it. 

Ecc 2:9 So I grew great, greater than anyone in Jerusalem before me; nor did my wisdom leave me. 

Ecc 2:10 I denied my eyes nothing that they desired, refused my heart no pleasure, for I found all my hard work 
a pleasure, such was the return for all my efforts. 

Ecc 2:1 1 I then reflected on all that my hands had achieved and all the effort I had put into its achieving. What 
futility it all was, what chasing after the wind! There is nothing to be gained under the sun. 

Ecc 2:12 My reflections then turned to wisdom, stupidity and folly. For instance, what can the successor of a 
king do? What has been done already. 

Ecc 2:13 More is to be gained from wisdom than from folly, just as one gains more from light than from 
darkness; this, of course, I see: 

Ecc 2:14 The wise have their eyes open, the fool walks in the dark. No doubt! But I know, too, that one fate 
awaits them both. 

Ecc 2:15 “Since the fool’s fate”, I thought to myself, “will be my fate too, what is the point of my having been 
wise?”. I realised that this too is futile. 

Ecc 2:16 For there is no lasting memory for the wise or the fool, and in the days to come both will be forgotten; 



the wise, no less than the fool, must die. 

Ecc 2:17 Life I have come to hate, for what is done under the sun disgusts me, since all is futility and chasing 
after the wind. 

Ecc 2:18 All I have toiled for under the sun and now bequeath to my successor I have come to hate; 

Ecc 2:19 who knows whether he will be wise or a fool? Yet he will be master of all the work into which I have put 
my efforts and wisdom under the sun. That is futile too. 

Ecc 2:20 I have come to despair of all the efforts I have expended under the sun. 

Ecc 2:21 For here is one who has laboured wisely, skilfully and successfully and must leave what is his own to 
someöne who has not toiled for it at all. This is futile too, and grossly unjust; 

Ecc 2:22 for what does he gain for all the toil and strain that he has undergone under the sun- 

Ecc 2:23 since his days are full of sorrow, his work is full of stress and even at night he has no peace of mind? 

This is futile too. 

Ecc 2:24 There is no happiness except in eating and drinking, and in enjoying one’s achievements; and I see 
that this too comes from God’s hand; 

Ecc 2:25 for who would get anything to eat or drink, unless all this came from him? 

Ecc 2:26 Wisdom, knowledge and joy, God gives to those who please him, but on the sinner he lays the task of 
gathering and storing up for someöne else who is pleasing to him. This too is futility and chasing after the wind. 
Ecc 3:1 There is a season for everything, a time for every occupation under heaven: 

Ecc 3:2 A time for giving birth, a time for dying; a time for planting, a time for uprooting what has been planted. 
Ecc 3:3 A time for killing, a time for healing; a time for knocking down, a time for building. 

Ecc 3:4 A time for tears, a time for laughter; a time for mourning, a time for dancing. 

Ecc 3:5 A time for throwing stones away, a time for gathering them; a time for embracing, a time to refrain from 
embracing. 

Ecc 3:6 A time for searching, a time for losing; a time for keeping, a time for discarding. 

Ecc 3:7 A time for tearing, a time for sewing; a time for keeping silent, a time for speaking. 

Ecc 3:8 A time for loving, a time for hating; a time for war, a time for peace. 

Ecc 3:9 What do people gain from the efforts they make? 

Ecc 3:10 I contemplate the task that God gives humanity to labour at. 

Ecc 3:11 All that he does is apt for its time; but although he has given us an awareness of the passage of time, 
we can grasp neither the beginning nor the end of what God does. 

Ecc 3:12 I know there is no happiness for a human being except in pleasure and enjoyment through life. 

Ecc 3:13 And when we eat and drink and find happiness in all our achievements, this is a gift from God. 

Ecc 3:14 I know that whatever God does will be for ever. To this there is nothing to add, from this there is 
nothing to subtract, and the way God acts inspires dread. 

Ecc 3:15 What is, has been already, what will be, is already; God seeks out anyone who is persecuted. 

Ecc 3:16 Again I observe under the sun: crime is where justice should be, the criminal is where the upright 
should be. 

Ecc 3:17 And I think to myself: the upright and the criminal will both be judged by God, since there is a time for 
every thing and every action here. 

Ecc 3:18 I think to myself: where human beings are concerned, this is so that God can test them and show them 
that they are animals. 

Ecc 3:19 For the fate of human and the fate of animal is the same: as the one dies, so the other dies; both have 
the selfsame breath. Fluman is in no way better off than animal — since all is futile. 

Ecc 3:20 Everything goes to the same place, everything comes from the dust, everything returns to the dust. 

Ecc 3:21 Who knows if the human spirit mounts upward or if the animal spirit goes downward to the earth? 

Ecc 3:22 I see there is no contentment for a human being except happiness in achievement; such is the lot of a 
human beings. No one can tell us what will happen after we are gone. 

Ecc 4:1 Then again, I contemplate all the oppression that is committed under the sun. Take for instance the 
tears of the oppressed. No one to comfort them! The power their oppressors wield. No one to comfort them! 

Ecc 4:2 So, rather than the living who still have lives to live, I congratulate the dead who have already met 
death; 

Ecc 4:3 happier than both of these are those who are yet unborn and have not seen the evil things that are done 
under the sun. 

Ecc 4:4 I see that all effort and all achievement spring from mutual jealousy. This too is futility and chasing after 
the wind. 

Ecc 4:5 The fool folds his arms and eats his own flesh away. 

Ecc 4:6 Better one hand full of repose than two hands full of achievements to chase after the wind. 

Ecc 4:7 And something else futile I observe under the sun: 

Ecc 4:8 a person is quite alone — no child, no brother; and yet there is no end to his efforts, his eyes can never 



have their fill of riches. For whom, then, do I work so hard and grudge myself pleasure? This too is futile, a sorry 
business. 

Ecc 4:9 Better two than one alone, since thus their work is really rewarding. 

Ecc 4:10 If one should fall, the other helps him up; but what of the person with no one to help him up when he 
falls? 

Ecc 4:1 1 Again: if two sleep together they keep warm, but how can anyone keep warm alone? 

Ecc 4:12 Where one alone would be overcome, two will put up resistance; and a threefold cord is not quickly 
broken. 

Ecc 4: 1 3 Better a youngster poor and wise than a monarch old and silly who will no longer take advice- 
Ecc 4:14 even though stepping from prison to the throne, even though born a beggar in that kingdom. 

Ecc 4:15 I observe that all who live and move under the sun support the young newcomer who takes over. 

Ecc 4:16 Fie takes his place at the head of innumerable subjects; but his successors will not think the more 
kindly of him for that. This too is futile and chasing after the wind. 

Ecc 4:17 Watch your step when you go to the Flouse of God: drawing near to listen is better than the offering of 
a sacrifice by fools, though they do not know that they are doing wrong. 

Ecc 5:1 Be in no hurry to speak; do not hastily declare yourself before God; for God is in heaven, you on earth. 
Be sparing, then, of speech: 

Ecc 5:2 From too much worrying comes illusion, from too much talking, the accents of folly. 

Ecc 5:3 If you make a vow to God, discharge it without delay, for God has no love for fools. Discharge your vow. 
Ecc 5:4 Better a vow unmade than made and not discharged. 

Ecc 5:5 Do not allow your mouth to make a sinner of you, and do not say to the messenger that it was a 
mistake. Why give God occasion to be angry with you and ruin all the work that you have done? 

Ecc 5:6 From too many illusions come futility and too much talk. Therefore, fear God. 

Ecc 5:7 If in a province you see the poor oppressed, fair judgement and justice violated, do not be surprised, for 
over every official there watches a higher official, and over these, higher officials still. 

Ecc 5:8 But what the land yields is for the benefit of all, a king is served by the fields. 

Ecc 5:9 No one who loves money ever has enough, no one who loves luxury has any income; this, too, is futile. 
Ecc 5:10 Where goods abound, parasites abound: where is the owner’s profit, apart from feasting his eyes? 

Ecc 5:1 1 The labourer’s sleep is sweet, whether he has eaten little or much, but the surfeit of the rich will not let 
him sleep at all. 

Ecc 5:12 Something grossly unjust I observe under the sun: riches stored and turning to loss for their owner. 

Ecc 5:13 An unlucky venture, and those riches are lost; a son is born to him, and he has nothing to leave him. 
Ecc 5:14 Naked from his mother’s womb he came; as naked as he came will he depart; not one of his 
achievements can he take with him. 

Ecc 5:15 And something else grossly unjust: that as he came, so must he go; what profit can he show after 
toiling to earn the wind, 

Ecc 5:16 as he spends the rest of his days in darkness, mourning, many sorrows, sickness and exasperation. 
Ecc 5:17 So my conclusion is this: true happiness lies in eating and drinking and enjoying whatever has been 
achieved under the sun, throughout the life given by God: for this is the lot of humanity. 

Ecc 5:18 And whenever God gives someöne riches and property, with the ability to enjoy them and to find 
contentment in work, this is a gift from God. 

Ecc 5:19 For such a person will hardly notice the passing of time, so long as God keeps his heart occupied with 
joy. 

Ecc 6:1 I see another evil under the sun, which goes hard with people: 

Ecc 6:2 suppose someöne has received from God riches, property, honours — nothing at all left to wish for; but 
God does not give the chance to enjoy them, and some stranger enjoys them. This is futile, and grievous 
suffering too. 

Ecc 6:3 Or take someöne who has had a hundred children and lived for many years, and, having reached old 
age, has never enjoyed the good things of life and has not even got a tomb; it seems to me, a still-born child is 
happier. 

Ecc 6:4 In futility it came, into darkness it departs, and in darkness will its name be buried. 

Ecc 6:5 It has never so much as seen or known the sun; all the same, it will rest more easily than that person, 
Ecc 6:6 who would never have known the good things of life, even by living a thousand years twice over. Do we 
not all go to the same place in the end? 

Ecc 6:7 All toil is for the mouth, yet the appetite is never satisfied. 

Ecc 6:8 What advantage has the wise over the fool? And what of the pauper who knows how to behave in 
society? 

Ecc 6:9 Better the object seen than the sting of desire: for the latter too is futile and chasing after the wind. 

Ecc 6:10 What has been is already defined — we know what people are: They cannot bring to justice one who is 



stronger than themselves. 

Ecc 6:1 1 The more we say, the more futile it is: what good can we derive from it? 

Ecc 6: 1 2 And who knows what is best for someöne during life, during the days of futile life which are spent like a 
shadow? Who can tell anyone what will happen after him under the sun? 

Ecc 7:1 Better a good name than costly oil, the day of death than the day of birth. 

Ecc 7:2 Better go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting; for to this end everyone comes, let the 
living take this to heart. 

Ecc 7:3 Better sadness than laughter: a joyful heart may be concealed behind sad looks. 

Ecc 7:4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, the heart of fools in the house of gaiety. 

Ecc 7:5 Better attend to the reprimand of the wise than listen to a song sung by a fool. 

Ecc 7:6 For like the crackling of thorns under the cauldron is the laughter of fools: and that too is futile. 

Ecc 7:7 But being oppressed drives a sage mad, and a present corrupts the heart. 

Ecc 7:8 Better the end of a matter than its beginning, better patience than ambition. 

Ecc 7:9 Do not be too easily exasperated, for exasperation dwells in the heart of fools. 

Ecc 7:10 Do not ask why the past was better than the present, for this is not a question prompted by wisdom. 
Ecc 7:1 1 Wisdom is as good as a legacy, profitable to those who enjoy the light of the sun. 

Ecc 7:12 For as money protects, so does wisdom, and the advantage of knowledge is this: that wisdom bestows 
life on those who possess her. 

Ecc 7:13 Consider God’s creation: who, for instance, can straighten what God has bent? 

Ecc 7:14 When things are going well, enjoy yourself, and when they are going badly, consider this: God has 
designed the one no less than the other so that we should take nothing for granted. 

Ecc 7:15 In my futile life, I have seen everything: the upright person perishing in uprightness and the wicked 
person surviving in wickedness. 

Ecc 7:16 Do not be upright to excess and do not make yourself unduly wise: why should you destroy yourself? 
Ecc 7:17 Do not be wicked to excess, and do not be a fool: why die before your time? 

Ecc 7:18 It is wise to hold on to one and not let go of the other, since the godfearing will find both. 

Ecc 7:19 Wisdom makes the wise stronger than a dozen governors in a city. 

Ecc 7:20 No one on earth is sufficiently upright to do good without ever sinning. 

Ecc 7:21 Again, do not listen to all that people say, then you will not hear your servant abusing you. 

Ecc 7:22 For often, as you very well know, you have abused others. 

Ecc 7:23 Thanks to wisdom, I have found all this to be true; I resolved to be wise, but this was beyond my 
reach! 

Ecc 7:24 The past is out of reach, buried deep — who can discover it? 

Ecc 7:25 But I have reached the point where, having learnt, explored and investigated wisdom and reflection, I 
recognise evil as being a form of madness, and folly as something stupid. 

Ecc 7:26 And I find woman more bitter than Death, she is a snare, her heart is a net, and her arms are chains. 
The man who is pleasing to God eludes her, but the sinner is captured by her. 

Ecc 7:27 This is what I think, says Qoheleth, having examined one thing after another to draw some conclusion, 
Ecc 7:28 which I am still looking for, although unsuccessfully: one man in a thousand, I may find, but a woman 
better than other women-never. 

Ecc 7:29 This alone is my conclusion: God has created man straightforward, and human artifices are human 
inventions. 

Ecc 8:1 Who compares with the sage? Who else knows how to explain things? Wisdom lights up the face, 
enlivening a grim expression. 

Ecc 8:2 Obey the king’s command and, because of the divine promise, 

Ecc 8:3 be in no hurry to depart from it; do not be obstinate in a bad cause, since the king will do as he likes in 
any case. 

Ecc 8:4 Since the word of a king is sovereign, what is the point of saying, “Why do that?”. 

Ecc 8:5 One who obeys the command will come to no harm; the heart of the sage knows the right moment and 
verdict, 

Ecc 8:6 for there is a right moment and verdict for everything; but misfortune lies heavy upon anyone 
Ecc 8:7 who does not know what the outcome will be, no one is going to say how things will turn out. 

Ecc 8:8 No one can control the wind and stop it from blowing, no one can control the day of death. From war 
there is no escape, no more can wickedness save the person who commits it. 

Ecc 8:9 I have seen all this to be so, having carefully studied everything taking place under the sun, while one 
person tyrannises over another to the former’s detriment. 

Ecc 8:10 And again, I have observed the wicked carried to their graves, and people leaving the holy place and, 
once out in the city, forgetting how the wicked used to behave; how futile this is too! 

Ecc 8:1 1 Because the sentence on the evil-doer is not carried out on the instant, people’s hearts are full of 



desire to do wrong. 

Ecc 8:12 The sinner who does wrong a hundred times lives on. But this too I know, that there is good in store for 
people who fear God, because they fear him, 

Ecc 8:13 but there is no good in store for the wicked because he does not fear God, and so, like a shadow, he 
will not prolong his days. 

Ecc 8:14 Another futile thing that happens on earth: upright people being treated as though they were wicked 
and wicked people being treated as though they were upright. To me this is one more example of futility. 

Ecc 8:15 And therefore I praise joy, since human happiness lies only in eating and drinking and in taking 
pleasure; this comes from what someöne achieves during the days of life that God gives under the sun. 

Ecc 8: 1 6 Having applied myself to acquiring wisdom and to observing the activity taking place in the world — for 
day and night our eyes enjoy no rest- 

Ecc 8:17 I have scrutinised God’s whole creation: you cannot get to the bottom of everything taking place under 
the sun; you may wear yourself out in the search, but you will never find it. Not even a sage can get to the 
bottom of it, even if he says that he has done so. 

Ecc 9:1 Yes, I have applied myself to all this and experienced all this to be so: that is to say, that the upright and 
the wise, with their activities, are in the hands of God. We do not understand either love or hate, where we are 
concerned, both of them are 

Ecc 9:2 futile. And for all of us is reserved a common fate, for the upright and for the wicked, for the good and 
for the bad; whether we are ritually pure or not, whether we offer sacrifice or not: it is the same for the good and 
for the sinner, for someöne who takes a vow, as for someöne who fears to do so. 

Ecc 9:3 This is another evil among those occurring under the sun: that there should be the same fate for 
everyone. The human heart, however, is full of wickedness; folly lurks in our hearts throughout our lives, until we 
end among the dead. 

Ecc 9:4 But there is hope for someöne still linked to the rest of the living: better be a live dog than a dead lion. 
Ecc 9:5 The living are at least aware that they are going to die, but the dead know nothing whatever. No more 
wages for them, since their memory is forgotten. 

Ecc 9:6 Their love, their hate, their jealousy, have perished long since, and they will never have any further part 
in what goes on under the sun. 

Ecc 9:7 So, eat your bread in joy, drink your wine with a glad heart, since God has already approved your 
actions. 

Ecc 9:8 At all times, dress in white and keep your head well scented. 

Ecc 9:9 Spend your life with the woman you love, all the days of futile life God gives you under the sun, 
throughout your futile days, since this is your lot in life and in the effort you expend under the sun. 

Ecc 9: 1 0 Whatever work you find to do, do it with all your might, for there is neither achievement, nor planning, 
nor science, nor wisdom in Sheol where you are going. 

Ecc 9:1 1 Another thing I have observed under the sun: that the race is not won by the speediest, nor the battle 
by the champions; it is not the wise who get food, nor the intelligent wealth, nor the learned favour: chance and 
mischance befall them all. 

Ecc 9: 1 2 We do not know when our time will come: like fish caught in the treacherous net, like birds caught in 
the snare, just so are we all trapped by misfortune when it suddenly overtakes us. 

Ecc 9: 1 3 Here is another example of the wisdom I have acquired under the sun and it strikes me as important: 
Ecc 9:14 There was once a small town, with only a few inhabitants; a mighty king made war on it, laying siege to 
it and building great siege-works round it. 

Ecc 9:15 But there was in that town a poverty-stricken sage who by his wisdom saved the town. No one 
remembered this poor man afterwards. 

Ecc 9:16 Sol say: Wisdom is more effective than brute force, but the wisdom of a poor man is not valued: no 
one listens to what he has to say. 

Ecc 9:17 The calm words of the wise make themselves heard above the shouts of someöne commanding an 
army of fools. 

Ecc 9:18 Wisdom is worth more than weapons of war, but a single sin undoes a deal of good. 

Ecc 10:1 One dead fly can spoil the scent-maker’s oil: a grain of stupidity outweighs wisdom and glory. 

Ecc 10:2 The sage’s heart leads him aright, the fool’s leads him astray. 

Ecc 10:3 A fool walks down the road, he has no wit — and everyone remarks, “How silly he is!”. 

Ecc 10:4 If the anger of the ruler rises against you, do not leave your post; composure mitigates grave offences. 
Ecc 10:5 One evil I observe under the sun: the sort of misjudgement to which rulers are prone- 
Ecc 10:6 folly promoted to the top and the rich taking the lowest place. 

Ecc 10:7 I see slaves riding on horses and princes on foot like slaves. 

Ecc 10:8 He who digs a pit falls into it, he who undermines a wall gets bitten by a snake, 

Ecc 10:9 he who quarries stones gets hurt by them, he who chops wood takes a risk from it. 



Ecc 10:10 If, for want of sharpening, the blade is blunt, you have to work twice as hard; but it is the outcome that 
makes wisdom rewarding. 

Ecc 10:11 If, for want of charming, the snake bites, the snake-charmer gets nothing out of it. 

Ecc 10:12 The sayings of a sage give pleasure, what a fool says procures his own ruin: 

Ecc 10:13 his words have their origin in stupidity and their ending in treacherous folly. 

Ecc 10:14 A fool talks a great deal, but none of us in fact can tell the future; what will happen after us, who can 
tell? 

Ecc 10:15 A fool finds hard work very tiring, he cannot even find his own way into town. 

Ecc 10:16 Woe to you, country with a lad for king, and where princes start feasting in the morning! 

Ecc 10:17 Happy the land whose king is nobly born, where princes eat at a respectable hour to keep 
themselves strong and not merely to revel! 

Ecc 10:18 Thanks to idleness, the roof-tree gives way, thanks to carelessness, the house lets in the rain. 

Ecc 10:19 We give parties to enjoy ourselves, wine makes us cheerful and money has an answer for everything. 
Ecc 10:20 Do not abuse the king, even in thought, do not abuse a rich man, even in your bedroom, for a bird of 
the air might carry the news, a winged messenger might repeat what you have said. 

Ecc 11:1 Cast your bread on the water, eventually you will recover it. 

Ecc 1 1 :2 Offer a share to seven or to eight people, you can never tell what disaster may occur. 

Ecc 1 1 :3 When clouds are full of rain, they will shed it on the earth. If a tree falls, whether south or north, where 
it falls, there it will lie. 

Ecc 1 1 :4 Keep watching the wind and you will never sow, keep staring at the clouds and you will never reap. 

Ecc 1 1 :5 You do not understand how the wind blows, or how the embryo grows in a woman’s womb: no more 
can you understand the work of God, the Creator of all. 

Ecc 11:6 In the morning, sow your seed, until evening, do not cease from labour, for of any two things you do 
not know which will succeed, or which of the two is the better. 

Ecc 1 1 :7 How sweet light is, how delightful it is to see the sun! 

Ecc 1 1 :8 However many years you live, enjoy them all, but remember, the days of darkness will be many: futility 
awaits you at the end. 

Ecc 1 1 :9 Young man, enjoy yourself while you are young, make the most of the days of your youth, follow the 
prompting and desire of heart and eye, but remember, God will call you to account for everything. 

Ecc 11:10 Rid your heart of indignation, keep your body clear of suffering, though youth and the age of black 
hair are both futile. 

Ecc 12:1 Remember your Creator while you are still young, before the bad days come, before the years come 
which, you will say, give you no pleasure; 

Ecc 12:2 before the sun and the light grow dim and the moon and stars, before the clouds return after the rain; 
Ecc 12:3 the time when your watchmen become shaky, when strong men are bent double, when the women, 
one by one, quit grinding, and, as they look out of the window, find their sight growing dim. 

Ecc 12:4 When the street-door is kept shut, when the sound of grinding fades away, when the first cry of a bird 
wakes you up, when all the singing has stopped; 

Ecc 12:5 when going uphill is an ordeal and you are frightened at every step you take- yet the almond tree is in 
flower and the grasshopper is weighed down and the caper-bush loses its tang; while you are on the way to your 
everlasting home and the mourners are assembling in the street; 

Ecc 12:6 before the silver thread snaps, or the golden bowl is cracked, or the pitcher shattered at the fountain, 
or the pulley broken at the well-head: 

Ecc 12:7 the dust returns to the earth from which it came, and the spirit returns to God who gave it. 

Ecc 12:8 Sheer futility, Qoheleth says, everything is futile. 

Ecc 12:9 Besides being a sage, Qoheleth taught the people what he himself knew, having weighed, studied and 
emended many proverbs. 

Ecc 12:10 Qoheleth took pains to write in an attractive style and by it to convey truths. 

Ecc 12:11 The sayings of a sage are like goads, like pegs positioned by shepherds: the same shepherd finds a 
use for both. 

Ecc 12:12 Furthermore, my child, you must realise that writing books involves endless hard work, and that much 
study wearies the body. 

Ecc 12:13 To sum up the whole matter: fear God and keep his commandments, for that is the duty of everyone. 
Ecc 12:14 For God will call all our deeds to judgement, all that is hidden, be it good or bad. 

Sol 1:1 Solomon’s Song of Songs: 

Sol 1 :2 BELOVED: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for your love-making is sweeter than wine; 

Sol 1:3 delicate is the fragrance of your perfume, your name is an oil poured out, and that is why girls love you. 
Sol 1:4 Draw me in your footsteps, let us run. The king has brought me into his rooms; you will be our joy and 
our gladness. We shall praise your love more than wine; how right it is to love you. 



Sol 1:5 BELOVED: I am black but lovely, daughters of Jerusalem, like the tents of Kedar, like the pavilions of 
Salmah. 

Sol 1 :6 Take no notice of my dark colouring, it is the sun that has burnt me. My mother’s sons turned their anger 
on me, they made me look after the vineyards. My own vineyard I had not looked after! 

Sol 1 :7 Tell me then, sweetheart, where will you lead your flock to graze, where will you rest it at noon? That I 
may no more wander like a vagabond beside the flocks of your companions. 

Sol 1 :8 CHORUS: If you do not know this, O loveliest of women, follow the tracks of the flock, and take your kids 
to graze close by the shepherds’ tents. 

Sol 1:9 LOVER: I compare you, my love, to my mare harnessed to Pharaoh’s chariot. 

Sol 1:10 Your cheeks show fair between their pendants and your neck within its necklaces. 

Sol 1:11 We shall make you golden earrings and beads of silver. 

Sol 1:12 DUO: -While the king rests in his own room my nard yields its perfume. 

Sol 1:13 My love is a sachet of myrrh lying between my breasts. 

Sol 1:14 My love is a cluster of henna flowers among the vines of En-Gedi. 

Sol 1:15 -How beautiful you are, my beloved, how beautiful you are! Your eyes are doves. 

Sol 1:16 -How beautiful you are, my love, and how you delight me! Our bed is the greensward. 

Sol 1:17 -The beams of our house are cedar trees, its panelling the cypress. 

Sol 2:1 -I am the rose of Sharon, the lily of the valleys. 

Sol 2:2 -As a lily among the thistles, so is my beloved among girls. 

Sol 2:3 -As an apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my love among young men. In his delightful shade 
I sit, and his fruit is sweet to my taste. 

Sol 2:4 He has taken me to his cellar, and his banner over me is love. 

Sol 2:5 Feed me with raisin cakes, restore me with apples, for I am sick with love. 

Sol 2:6 His left arm is under my head, his right embraces me. 

Sol 2:7 -I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, by all gazelles and wild does, do not rouse, do not wake my 
beloved before she pleases. 

Sol 2:8 BELOVED: I hear my love. See how he comes leaping on the mountains, bounding over the hills. 

Sol 2:9 My love is like a gazelle, like a young stag. See where he stands behind our wall. He looks in at the 
window, he peers through the opening. 

Sol 2:10 My love lifts up his voice, he says to me, “Come then, my beloved, my lovely one, come. 

Sol 2:1 1 For see, winter is past, the rains are over and gone. 

Sol 2:12 “Flowers are appearing on the earth. The season of glad songs has come, the cooing of the turtledove 
is heard in our land. 

Sol 2:13 The fig tree is forming its first figs and the blossoming vines give out their fragrance. Come then, my 
beloved, my lovely one, come. 

Sol 2:14 “My dove, hiding in the clefts of the rock, in the coverts of the cliff, show me your face, let me hear your 
voice; for your voice is sweet and your face is lovely”. 

Sol 2:15 Catch the foxes for us, the little foxes that make havoc of the vineyards, for our vineyards are in fruit. 
Sol 2:16 My love is mine and I am his. He pastures his flock among the lilies. 

Sol 2:17 Before the day-breeze rises, before the shadows flee, return! Be, my love, like a gazelle, like a young 
stag, on the mountains of Bether. 

Sol 3:1 On my bed at night I sought the man who is my sweetheart: I sought but could not find him! 

Sol 3:2 So I shall get up and go through the city; in the streets and in the squares, I shall seek my sweetheart. I 
sought but could not find him! 

Sol 3:3 I came upon the watchmen — those who go on their rounds in the city: “Have you seen my sweetheart?”. 
Sol 3:4 Barely had I passed them when I found my sweetheart. I caught him, would not let him go, not till I had 
brought him to my mother’s house, to the room where she conceived me! 

Sol 3:5 LOVER: I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, by gazelles and wild does, do not rouse, do not wake my 
beloved before she pleases. 

Sol 3:6 POET : What is this coming up from the desert like a column of smoke, breathing of myrrh and 
frankincense and every exotic perfume? 

Sol 3:7 Here comes Solomon’s litter. Around it are sixty champions, the flower of the warriors of Israel; 

Sol 3:8 all of them skilled swordsmen, expert in war. Each man has his sword at his side, against alarms by 
night. 

Sol 3:9 King Solomon has had a palanquin made of wood from Lebanon. 

Sol 3:10 He has had the posts made of silver, the canopy of gold, the seat of purple; the centre is inlaid with 
ebony. 

Sol 3:11 Daughters of Zion, come and see King Solomon, wearing the diadem with which his mother crowned 
him on his wedding day, on the day of his heart’s joy. 



Sol 4:1 LOVER: How beautiful you are, my beloved, how beautiful you are! Your eyes are doves, behind your 
veil; your hair is like a flock of goats surging down Mount Gilead. 

Sol 4:2 Your teeth, a flock of sheep to be shorn when they come up from the washing. Each one has its twin, 
not one unpaired with another. 

Sol 4:3 Your lips are a scarlet thread and your words enchanting. Your cheeks, behind your veil, are halves of 
pomegranate. 

Sol 4:4 Your neck is the Tower of David built on layers, hung round with a thousand bucklers, and each the 
shield of a hero. 

Sol 4:5 Your two breasts are two fawns, twins of a gazelle, that feed among the lilies. 

Sol 4:6 Before the day-breeze rises, before the shadows flee, I shall go to the mountain of myrrh, to the hill of 
frankincense. 

Sol 4:7 You are wholly beautiful, my beloved, and without a blemish. 

Sol 4:8 Come from Lebanon, my promised bride, come from Lebanon, come on your way. Look down from the 
heights of Amanus, from the crests of Senir and Hermon, the haunt of lions, the mountains of leopards. 

Sol 4:9 You ravish my heart, my sister, my promised bride, you ravish my heart with a single one of your 
glances, with a single link of your necklace. 

Sol 4:10 What spells lie in your love, my sister, my promised bride! How delicious is your love, more delicious 
than wine! How fragrant your perfumes, more fragrant than all spices! 

Sol 4:1 1 Your lips, my promised bride, distil wild honey. Honey and milk are under your tongue; and the scent of 
your garments is like the scent of Lebanon. 

Sol 4:12 She is a garden enclosed, my sister, my promised bride; a garden enclosed, a sealed fountain. 

Sol 4:13 Your shoots form an orchard of pomegranate trees, bearing most exquisite fruit: 

Sol 4:14 nard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all the incense-bearing trees; myrrh and aloes, with the 
subtlest odours. 

Sol 4:15 Fountain of the garden, well of living water, streams flowing down from Lebanon! 

Sol 4:16 BELOVED: Awake, north wind, come, wind of the south! Breathe over my garden, to spread its sweet 
smell around. Let my love come into his garden, let him taste its most exquisite fruits. 

Sol 5:1 LOVER: I come into my garden, my sister, my promised bride, I pick my myrrh and balsam, I eat my 
honey and my honeycomb, I drink my wine and my milk. POET: Eat, friends, and drink, drink deep, my dearest 
friends. 

Sol 5:2 BELOVED: I sleep, but my heart is awake. I hear my love knocking. “Open to me, my sister, my beloved, 
my dove, my perfect one, for my head is wet with dew, my hair with the drops of night”. 

Sol 5:3 -'I have taken off my tunic, am I to put it on again? I have washed my feet, am I to dirty them again?”. 

Sol 5:4 My love thrust his hand through the hole in the door; I trembled to the core of my being. 

Sol 5:5 Then I got up to open to my love, myrrh ran off my hands, pure myrrh off my fingers, on to the handle of 
the bolt. 

Sol 5:6 I opened to my love, but he had turned and gone. My soul failed at his flight, I sought but could not find 
him, I called, but he did not answer. 

Sol 5:7 The watchmen met me, those who go on their rounds in the city. They beat me, they wounded me, they 
took my cloak away from me: those guardians of the ramparts! 

Sol 5:8 I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, if you should find my love, what are you to tell him? -That I am 
sick with love! 

Sol 5:9 CHORUS: What makes your lover better than other lovers, O loveliest of women? What makes your 
lover better than other lovers, to put us under such an oath? 

Sol 5:10 BELOVED: My love is fresh and ruddy, to be known among ten thousand. 

Sol 5:1 1 His head is golden, purest gold, his locks are palm fronds and black as the raven. 

Sol 5:12 His eyes are like doves beside the water-courses, bathing themselves in milk, perching on a fountain- 
rim. 

Sol 5:13 His cheeks are beds of spices, banks sweetly scented. His lips are lilies, distilling pure myrrh. 

Sol 5:14 His hands are golden, rounded, set with jewels of Tarshish. His belly a block of ivory covered with 
sapphires. 

Sol 5:15 His legs are alabaster columns set in sockets of pure gold. His appearance is that of Lebanon, 
unrivalled as the cedars. 

Sol 5:16 His conversation is sweetness itself, he is altogether lovable. Such is my love, such is my friend, O 
daughters of Jerusalem. 

Sol 6:1 CHORUS: Where did your lover go, O loveliest of women? Which way did your lover turn so that we can 
help you seek him? 

Sol 6:2 BELOVED: My love went down to his garden, to the beds of spices, to pasture his flock on the grass and 
gather lilies. 



Sol 6:3 I belong to my love, and my love to me. He pastures his flock among the lilies. 

Sol 6:4 LOVER: You are fair as Tirzah, my beloved, enchanting as Jerusalem, formidable as an army! 

Sol 6:5 Turn your eyes away from me, they take me by assault! Your hair is like a flock of goats surging down 
the slopes of Gilead. 

Sol 6:6 Your teeth are like a flock of ewes as they come up from being washed. Each one has its twin, not one 
unpaired with another. 

Sol 6:7 Your cheeks, behind your veil, are halves of pomegranate. 

Sol 6:8 There are sixty queens and eighty concubines (and countless girls). 

Sol 6:9 My dove is my only one, perfect and mine. She is the darling of her mother, the favourite of the one who 
bore her. Girls have seen her and proclaimed her blessed, queens and concubines have sung her praises, 

Sol 6:10 “Who is this arising like the dawn, fair as the moon, resplendent as the sun, formidable as an army?”. 

Sol 6:11 I went down to the nut orchard to see the fresh shoots in the valley, to see if the vines were budding 
and the pomegranate trees in flower. 

Sol 6:12 Before I knew ... my desire had hurled me onto the chariots of Amminadib! 

Sol 7:1 CHORUS: Come back, come back, girl from Shulam, come back, come back, where we can look at you! 
Why are you looking at the girl from Shulam, dancing between two lines of dancers? 

Sol 7:2 LOVER: How beautiful are your feet in their sandals, O prince’s daughter! The curve of your thighs is 
like the curve of a necklace, work of a master hand. 

Sol 7:3 Your navel is a bowl well rounded with no lack of wine, your belly a heap of wheat surrounded with lilies. 
Sol 7:4 Your two breasts are two fawns, twins of a gazelle. 

Sol 7:5 Your neck is an ivory tower. Your eyes, the pools of Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-Rabbim. Your nose, 
the Tower of Lebanon, sentinel facing Damascus. 

Sol 7:6 Your head is held high like Carmel, and its hair is as dark as purple; a king is held captive in your 
tresses. 

Sol 7:7 How beautiful you are, how charming, my love, my delight! 

Sol 7:8 In stature like the palm tree, its fruit-clusters your breasts. 

Sol 7:9 I have decided, “I shall climb the palm tree, I shall seize its clusters of dates!”. May your breasts be 
clusters of grapes, your breath sweet-scented as apples, 

Sol 7:10 and your palate like sweet wine. BELOVED: Flowing down the throat of my love, as it runs on the lips 
of those who sleep. 

Sol 7:1 1 I belong to my love, and his desire is for me. 

Sol 7:12 Come, my love, let us go to the fields. We will spend the night in the villages, 

Sol 7:13 and in the early morning we will go to the vineyards. We will see if the vines are budding, if their 
blossoms are opening, if the pomegranate trees are in flower. Then I shall give you the gift of my love. 

Sol 7:14 The mandrakes yield their fragrance, the most exquisite fruits are at our doors; the new as well as the 
old, I have stored them for you, my love. 

Sol 8:1 Ah, why are you not my brother, nursed at my mother’s breast! Then if I met you out of doors, I could 
kiss you without people thinking ill of me. 

Sol 8:2 I should lead you, I should take you into my mother’s house, and you would teach me! I should give you 
spiced wine to drink, juice of my pomegranates. 

Sol 8:3 His left arm is under my head and his right embraces me. 

Sol 8:4 LOVER: I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, do not rouse, do not wake my beloved, before she 
pleases! 

Sol 8:5 Who is this coming up from the desert leaning on her lover? I awakened you under the apple tree, where 
your mother conceived you, where she who bore you conceived you. 

Sol 8:6 BELOVED: Set me like a seal on your heart, like a seal on your arm. For love is strong as Death, 
passion as relentless as Sheol. The flash of it is a flash of fire, a flame of Yahweh himself. 

Sol 8:7 Love no flood can quench, no torrents drown. Were a man to offer all his family wealth to buy love, 
contempt is all that he would gain. 

Sol 8:8 Our sister is little: her breasts are not yet formed. What shall we do for our sister on the day she is 
spoken for? 

Sol 8:9 If she is a rampart, on the crest we shall build a battlement of silver; if she is a door, we shall board her 
up with planks of cedar. 

Sol 8:10 I am a wall, and my breasts represent its towers. And under their eyes I have found true peace. 

Sol 8:1 1 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-Hamon. He entrusted it to overseers, and each one was to pay him 
the value of its produce, a thousand shekels of silver. 

Sol 8:12 But I tend my own vineyard myself. You, Solomon, may have your thousand shekels, and those who 
oversee its produce their two hundred. 

Sol 8:13 You who dwell in the gardens, my companions listen for your voice; let me hear it. 



Sol 8:14 Haste away, my love, be like a gazelle, a young stag, on the spice-laden mountains. 

Wis 1:1 Love uprightness you who are rulers on earth, be properly disposed towards the Lord and seek him in 
simplicity of heart; 

Wis 1 :2 for he will be found by those who do not put him to the test, revealing himself to those who do not 
mistrust him. 

Wis 1:3 Perverse thoughts, however, separate people from God, and power, when put to the test, confounds the 
stupid. 

Wis 1 :4 Wisdom will never enter the soul of a wrong-doer, nor dwell in a body enslaved to sin; 

Wis 1 :5 for the holy spirit of instruction flees deceitfulness, recoils from unintelligent thoughts, is thwarted by the 
onset of vice. 

Wis 1 :6 Wisdom is a spirit friendly to humanity, though she will not let a blasphemer’s words go unpunished; 
since God observes the very soul and accurately surveys the heart, listening to every word. 

Wis 1 :7 For the spirit of the Lord fills the world, and that which holds everything together knows every word said. 
Wis 1 :8 No one who speaks what is wrong will go undetected, nor will avenging Justice pass by such a one. 

Wis 1 :9 For the schemes of the godless will be examined, and a report of his words will reach the Lord to 
convict him of his crimes. 

Wis 1:10 There is a jealous ear that overhears everything, not even a murmur of complaint escapes it. 

Wis 1:11 So beware of uttering frivolous complaints, restrain your tongue from finding fault; even what is said in 
secret has repercussions, and a lying mouth deals death to the soul. 

Wis 1:12 Do not court death by the errors of your ways, nor invite destruction through the work of your hands. 
Wis 1:13 For God did not make Death, he takes no pleasure in destroying the living. 

Wis 1:14 To exist — for this he created all things; the creatures of the world have health in them, in them is no 
fatal poison, and Hades has no power over the world: 

Wis 1:15 for uprightness is immortal. 

Wis 1:16 But the godless call for Death with deed and word, counting him friend, they wear themselves out for 
him; with him they make a pact, worthy as they are to belong to him. 

Wis 2:1 And this is the false argument they use, “Our life is short and dreary, there is no remedy when our end 
comes, no one is known to have come back from Hades. 

Wis 2:2 We came into being by chance and afterwards shall be as though we had never been. The breath in our 
nostrils is a puff of smoke, reason a spark from the beating of our hearts; 

Wis 2:3 extinguish this and the body turns to ashes, and the spirit melts away like the yielding air. 

Wis 2:4 In time, our name will be forgotten, nobody will remember what we have done; our life will pass away 
like wisps of cloud, dissolving like the mist that the sun’s rays drive away and that its heat dispels. 

Wis 2:5 For our days are the passing of a shadow, our end is without return, the seal is affixed and nobody 
comes back. 

Wis 2:6 “Come then, let us enjoy the good things of today, let us use created things with the zest of youth: 

Wis 2:7 take our fill of the dearest wines and perfumes, on no account forgo the flowers of spring 
Wis 2:8 but crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither, 

Wis 2:9 no meadow excluded from our orgy; let us leave the signs of our revelry everywhere, since this is our 
portion, this our lot! 

Wis 2:10 “As for the upright man who is poor, let us oppress him; let us not spare the widow, nor respect old 
age, white-haired with many years. 

Wis 2:1 1 Let our might be the yardstick of right, since weakness argues its own futility. 

Wis 2:12 Let us lay traps for the upright man, since he annoys us and opposes our way of life, reproaches us for 
our sins against the Law, and accuses us of sins against our upbringing. 

Wis 2:13 He claims to have knowledge of God, and calls himself a child of the Lord. 

Wis 2:14 We see him as a reproof to our way of thinking, the very sight of him weighs our spirits down; 

Wis 2:15 for his kind of life is not like other people’s, and his ways are quite different. 

Wis 2:16 In his opinion we are counterfeit; he avoids our ways as he would filth; he proclaims the final end of the 
upright as blessed and boasts of having God for his father. 

Wis 2:17 Let us see if what he says is true, and test him to see what sort of end he will have. 

Wis 2:18 For if the upright man is God’s son, God will help him and rescue him from the clutches of his 
enemies. 

Wis 2:19 Let us test him with cruelty and with torture, and thus explore this gentleness of his and put his 
patience to the test. 

Wis 2:20 Let us condemn him to a shameful death since God will rescue him — or so he claims”. 

Wis 2:21 This is the way they reason, but they are misled, since their malice makes them blind. 

Wis 2:22 They do not know the hidden things of God, they do not hope for the reward of holiness, they do not 
believe in a reward for blameless souls. 



Wis 2:23 For God created human beings to be immortal, he made them as an image of his own nature; 

Wis 2:24 Death came into the world only through the Devil’s envy, as those who belong to him find to their cost. 
Wis 3:1 But the souls of the upright are in the hands of God, and no torment can touch them. 

Wis 3:2 To the unenlightened, they appeared to die, their departure was regarded as disaster, 

Wis 3:3 their leaving us like annihilation; but they are at peace. 

Wis 3:4 If, as it seemed to us, they suffered punishment, their hope was rich with immortality; 

Wis 3:5 slight was their correction, great will their blessings be. God was putting them to the test and has proved 
them worthy to be with him; 

Wis 3:6 he has tested them like gold in a furnace, and accepted them as a perfect burnt offering. 

Wis 3:7 At their time of visitation, they will shine out; as sparks run through the stubble, so will they. 

Wis 3:8 They will judge nations, rule over peoples, and the Lord will be their king for ever. 

Wis 3:9 Those who trust in him will understand the truth, those who are faithful will live with him in love; for 
grace and mercy await his holy ones, and he intervenes on behalf of his chosen. 

Wis 3:10 But the godless will be duly punished for their reasoning, for having neglected the upright and deserted 
the Lord. 

Wis 3:1 1 Yes, wretched are they who scorn wisdom and discipline: their hope is void, their toil unavailing, their 
achievements unprofitable; 

Wis 3:12 their wives are reckless, their children depraved, their descendants accursed. 

Wis 3:13 Blessed the sterile woman if she be blameless, and has not known an unlawful bed, for she will have 
fruit at the visitation of souls. 

Wis 3:14 Blessed, too, the eunuch whose hand commits no crime, and who harbours no resentment against the 
Lord: a special favour will be granted to him for his loyalty, a most desirable portion in the temple of the Lord. 

Wis 3:15 For the fruit of honest labours is glorious, and the root of understanding does not decay. 

Wis 3:16 But the children of adulterers will not reach maturity, the offspring of an unlawful bed will disappear. 

Wis 3: 1 7 Even if they live long, they will count for nothing, their old age will go unhonoured at the last; 

Wis 3: 1 8 while if they die early, they have neither hope nor comfort on the day of judgement, 

Wis 3:19 for the end of a race of evil-doers is harsh. 

Wis 4:1 Better to have no children yet to have virtue, since immortality perpetuates its memory; for God and 
human beings both recognise it. 

Wis 4:2 Present, we imitate it, absent, we long for it; crowned, it holds triumph through eternity, having striven 
for untainted prizes and emerged the victor. 

Wis 4:3 But the offspring of the godless come to nothing, however prolific, sprung from a bastard stock, they will 
never strike deep roots, never put down firm foundations. 

Wis 4:4 They may branch out for a time, but, on unsteady foundations, they will be rocked by the wind and 
uprooted by the force of the storm; 

Wis 4:5 their branches, yet unformed, will be snapped off, their fruit be useless, too unripe to eat, fit for nothing. 
Wis 4:6 For children begotten of unlawful bed witness, when put on trial, to their parents’ wickedness. 

Wis 4:7 The upright, though he die before his time, will find rest. 

Wis 4:8 Length of days is not what makes age honourable, nor number of years the true measure of life; 

Wis 4:9 understanding, this is grey hairs, untarnished life, this is ripe old age. 

Wis 4:10 Having won God’s favour, he has been loved and, as he was living among sinners, has been taken 
away. 

Wis 4:1 1 He has been carried off so that evil may not warp his understanding or deceitfulness seduce his soul; 
Wis 4: 1 2 for the fascination of evil throws good things into the shade, and the whirlwind of desire corrupts a 
simple heart. 

Wis 4:13 Having come to perfection so soon, he has lived long; 

Wis 4:14 his soul being pleasing to the Lord, he has hurried away from the wickedness around him. Yet people 
look on, uncomprehending; and it does not enter their heads 

Wis 4:15 that grace and mercy await his chosen ones and that he intervenes on behalf of his holy ones. 

Wis 4: 1 6 The upright who dies condemns the godless who survive, and youth quickly perfected condemns the 
lengthy old age of the wicked. 

Wis 4:17 These people see the end of the wise without understanding what the Lord has in store or why he has 
taken such a one to safety; 

Wis 4: 1 8 they look on and sneer, but the Lord will laugh at them. 

Wis 4:19 Soon they will be corpses without honour, objects of horror among the dead for ever. For he will 
shatter them and fling them headlong and dumbfounded. He will shake them from their foundations; they will be 
utterly laid waste, a prey to grief, and their memory will perish. 

Wis 4:20 When the count of their sins has been drawn up, in terror they will come, and their crimes, confronting 
them, will accuse them. 



Wis 5:1 Then the upright will stand up boldly to face those who had oppressed him and had thought so little of 
his sufferings. 

Wis 5:2 And, seeing him, they will be seized with terrible fear, amazed that he should have been so 
unexpectedly saved. 

Wis 5:3 Stricken with remorse, they will say to one another with groans and labouring breath, 

Wis 5:4 “This is the one whom we used to mock, making him the butt of our insults, fools that we were! His life 
we regarded as madness, his ending as without honour. 

Wis 5:5 How has he come to be counted as one of the children of God and to have his lot among the holy ones? 
Wis 5:6 Clearly we have strayed from the way of truth; the light of justice has not shone for us, the sun has not 
risen for us. 

Wis 5:7 We have left no path of lawlessness or ruin unexplored, we have crossed deserts where there was no 
track, but the way of the Lord is one we have never known. 

Wis 5:8 What good has arrogance been to us? What has been the purpose of our riches and boastfulness? 

Wis 5:9 All those things have passed like a shadow, passed like a fleeting rumour. 

Wis 5:10 Like a ship that cuts through heaving waves — leaving no trace to show where it has passed, no wake 
from its keel in the waves. 

Wis 5:1 1 Or like a bird flying through the air — leaving no proof of its passing; it whips the light air with the stroke 
of its pinions, tears it apart in its whirring rush, drives its way onward with sweeping wing, and afterwards no sign 
is seen of its passage. 

Wis 5:12 Or like an arrow shot at a mark, the pierced air closing so quickly on itself, there is no knowing which 
way the arrow has passed. 

Wis 5:13 So with us: scarcely born, we disappear; of virtue not a trace have we to show, we have spent 
ourselves in our own wickedness!”. 

Wis 5:14 For the hope of the godless is like chaff carried on the wind, like fine spray driven by the storm; it 
disperses like smoke before the wind, goes away like the memory of a one-day guest. 

Wis 5:15 But the upright live for ever, their recompense is with the Lord, and the Most High takes care of them. 
Wis 5:16 So they will receive the glorious crown and the diadem of beauty from the Lord’s hand; for he will 
shelter them with his right hand and with his arm he will shield them. 

Wis 5:17 For armour he will take his jealous love, he will arm creation to punish his enemies; 

Wis 5:18 he will put on justice as a breastplate, and for helmet wear his forthright judgement; 

Wis 5:19 he will take up invincible holiness for shield, 

Wis 5:20 of his pitiless wrath he will forge a sword, and the universe will march with him to fight the reckless. 

Wis 5:21 Bolts truly aimed, the shafts of lightning will leap, and from the clouds, as from a full-drawn bow, fly to 
their mark; 

Wis 5:22 and the catapult will hurl hailstones charged with fury. The waters of the sea will rage against them, 
the rivers engulf them without pity, 

Wis 5:23 a mighty gale will rise against them and winnow them like a hurricane. Thus wickedness will lay the 
whole earth waste and evil-doing bring down the thrones of the mighty. 

Wis 6:1 Listen then, kings, and understand; rulers of remotest lands, take warning; 

Wis 6:2 hear this, you who govern great populations, taking pride in your hosts of subject nations! 

Wis 6:3 For sovereignty is given to you by the Lord and power by the Most High, who will himself probe your 
acts and scrutinise your intentions. 

Wis 6:4 If therefore, as servants of his kingdom, you have not ruled justly nor observed the law, nor followed the 
will of God, 

Wis 6:5 he will fall on you swiftly and terribly. On the highly placed a ruthless judgement falls; 

Wis 6:6 the lowly are pardoned, out of pity, but the mighty will be mightily tormented. 

Wis 6:7 For the Lord of all does not cower before anyone, he does not stand in awe of greatness, since he 
himself has made small and great and provides for all alike; 

Wis 6:8 but a searching trial awaits those who wield power. 

Wis 6:9 So, monarchs, my words are meant for you, so that you may learn wisdom and not fall into error; 

Wis 6:10 for those who in holiness observe holy things will be adjudged holy, and, accepting instruction from 
them, will find their defence in them. 

Wis 6:1 1 Set your heart, therefore, on what I have to say, listen with a will, and you will be instructed. 

Wis 6:12 Wisdom is brilliant, she never fades. By those who love her, she is readily seen, by those who seek 
her, she is readily found. 

Wis 6:13 She anticipates those who desire her by making herself known first. 

Wis 6:14 Whoëver gets up early to seek her will have no trouble but will find her sitting at the door. 

Wis 6: 1 5 Meditating on her is understanding in its perfect form, and anyone keeping awake for her will soon be 
free from care. 



Wis 6:16 For she herself searches everywhere for those who are worthy of her, benevolently appearing to them 
on their ways, anticipating their every thought. 

Wis 6:17 For Wisdom begins with the sincere desire for instruction, care for instruction means loving her, 

Wis 6:18 loving her means keeping her laws, attention to her laws guarantees incorruptibility, 

Wis 6:19 and incorruptibility brings us near to God; 

Wis 6:20 the desire for Wisdom thus leads to sovereignty. 

Wis 6:21 If then thrones and sceptres delight you, monarchs of the nations, honour Wisdom, so that you may 
reign for ever. 

Wis 6:22 What Wisdom is and how she was born, I shall now explain; I shall hide no mysteries from you, but 
shall follow her steps from the outset of her origin, setting out what we know of her in full light, without departing 
from the truth. 

Wis 6:23 Blighting envy is no companion for me, for envy has nothing in common with Wisdom. 

Wis 6:24 In the greatest number of the wise lies the world’s salvation, in a sagacious king the stability of a 
people. 

Wis 6:25 Learn, therefore, from my words; the gain will be yours. 

Wis 7:1 I too am mortal like everyone else, a descendant of the first man formed from the earth. I was modelled 
in flesh inside a mother’s womb, 

Wis 7:2 where, for ten months, in blood I acquired substance — the result of virile seed and pleasure, sleep’s 
companion. 

Wis 7:3 I too, when I was born, drew in the common air, I fell on the same ground that bears us all, and crying 
was the first sound I made, like everyone else. 

Wis 7:4 I was nurtured in swaddling clothes, with every care. 

Wis 7:5 No king has known any other beginning of existence; 

Wis 7:6 for there is only one way into life, and one way out of it. 

Wis 7:7 And so I prayed, and understanding was given me; I entreated, and the spirit of Wisdom came to me. 
Wis 7:8 I esteemed her more than sceptres and thrones; compared with her, I held riches as nothing. 

Wis 7:9 I reckoned no precious stone to be her equal, for compared with her, all gold is a pinch of sand, and 
beside her, silver ranks as mud. 

Wis 7:10 I loved her more than health or beauty, preferred her to the light, since her radiance never sleeps. 

Wis 7:1 1 In her company all good things came to me, and at her hands incalculable wealth. 

Wis 7:12 All these delighted me, since Wisdom brings them, though I did not then realise that she was their 
mother. 

Wis 7:13 What I learned diligently, I shall pass on liberally, I shall not conceal how rich she is. 

Wis 7:14 For she is to human beings an inexhaustible treasure, and those who acquire this win God’s 
friendship, commended to him by the gifts of instruction. 

Wis 7:15 May God grant me to speak as he would wish and conceive thoughts worthy of the gifts I have 
received, since he is both guide to Wisdom and director of sages; 

Wis 7:16 for we are in his hand, yes, ourselves and our sayings, and all intellectual and all practical knowledge. 
Wis 7:17 Fie it was who gave me sure knowledge of what exists, to understand the structure of the world and 
the action of the elements, 

Wis 7:18 the beginning, end and middle of the times, the alternation of the solstices and the succession of the 
seasons, 

Wis 7:19 the cycles of the year and the position of the stars, 

Wis 7:20 the natures of animals and the instincts of wild beasts, the powers of spirits and human mental 
processes, the varieties of plants and the medical properties of roots. 

Wis 7:21 And now I understand everything, hidden or visible, for Wisdom, the designer of all things, has 
instructed me. 

Wis 7:22 For within her is a spirit intelligent, holy, unique, manifold, subtle, mobile, incisive, unsullied, lucid, 
invulnerable, benevolent, shrewd, 

Wis 7:23 irresistible, beneficent, friendly to human beings, steadfast, dependable, unperturbed, almighty, all- 
surveying, penetrating all intelligent, pure and most subtle spirits. 

Wis 7:24 For Wisdom is quicker to move than any motion; she is so pure, she pervades and permeates all 
things. 

Wis 7:25 She is a breath of the power of God, pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty; so nothing impure 
can find its way into her. 

Wis 7:26 For she is a reflection of the eternal light, untarnished mirror of God’s active power, and image of his 
goodness. 

Wis 7:27 Although she is alone, she can do everything; herself unchanging, she renews the world, and, 
generation after generation, passing into holy souls, she makes them into God’s friends and prophets; 



Wis 7:28 for God loves only those who dwell with Wisdom. 

Wis 7:29 She is indeed more splendid than the sun, she outshines all the constellations; compared with light, 
she takes first place, 

Wis 7:30 for light must yield to night, but against Wisdom evil cannot prevail. 

Wis 8:1 Strongly she reaches from one end of the world to the other and she governs the whole world for its 
good. 

Wis 8:2 Wisdom I loved and searched for from my youth; I resolved to have her as my bride, I fell in love with 
her beauty. 

Wis 8:3 She enhances her noble birth by sharing God’s life, for the Master of All has always loved her. 

Wis 8:4 Indeed, she shares the secrets of God’s knowledge, and she chooses what he will do. 

Wis 8:5 If in this life wealth is a desirable possession, what is more wealthy than Wisdom whose work is 
everywhere? 

Wis 8:6 Or if it be the intellect that is at work, who, more than she, designs whatever exists? 

Wis 8:7 Or if it be uprightness you love, why, virtues are the fruit of her labours, since it is she who teaches 
temperance and prudence, justice and fortitude; nothing in life is more useful for human beings. 

Wis 8:8 Or if you are eager for wide experience, she knows the past, she forecasts the future; she knows how to 
turn maxims, and solve riddles; she has foreknowledge of signs and wonders, and of the unfolding of the ages 
and the times. 

Wis 8:9 I therefore determined to take her to share my life, knowing that she would be my counsellor in 
prosperity and comfort me in cares and sorrow. 

Wis 8:10 “Thanks to her, I shall be admired by the masses and honoured, though young, by the elders. 

Wis 8:1 1 I shall be reckoned shrewd as a judge, and the great will be amazed at me. 

Wis 8:12 They will wait on my silences, and pay attention when I speak; if I speak at some length, they will lay 
their hand on their lips. 

Wis 8:13 By means of her, immortality will be mine, I shall leave an everlasting memory to my successors. 

Wis 8:14 I shall govern peoples, and nations will be subject to me; 

Wis 8:15 at the sound of my name fearsome despots will be afraid; I shall show myself kind to the people and 
valiant in battle. 

Wis 8:16 “When I go home I shall take my ease with her, for nothing is bitter in her company, when life is shared 
with her there is no pain, nothing but pleasure and joy”. 

Wis 8:17 Having meditated on all this, and having come to the conclusion that immortality resides in kinship with 
Wisdom, 

Wis 8:18 noble contentment in her friendship, inexhaustible riches in her activities, understanding in cultivating 
her society, and renown in conversing with her, I went all ways, seeking how to get her. 

Wis 8:19 I was a boy of happy disposition, I had received a good soul as my lot, 

Wis 8:20 or rather, being good, I had entered an undefiled body; 

Wis 8:21 but, realising that I could never possess Wisdom unless God gave her to me, -a sign of intelligence in 
itself, to know in whose gift she lay — 1 prayed to the Lord and entreated him, and with all my heart I said: 

Wis 9:1 “God of our ancestors, Lord of mercy, who by your word have made the universe, 

Wis 9:2 and in your wisdom have fitted human beings to rule the creatures that you have made, 

Wis 9:3 to govern the world in holiness and saving justice and in honesty of soul to dispense fair judgement, 

Wis 9:4 grant me Wisdom, consort of your throne, and do not reject me from the number of your children. 

Wis 9:5 For I am your servant, son of your serving maid, a feeble man, with little time to live, with small 

understanding of justice and the laws. 

Wis 9:6 Indeed, were anyone perfect among the sons of men, if he lacked the Wisdom that comes from you, he 
would still count for nothing. 

Wis 9:7 “You have chosen me to be king over your people, to be judge of your sons and daughters. 

Wis 9:8 You have bidden me build a temple on your holy mountain, and an altar in the city where you have 
pitched your tent, a copy of the holy Tent which you prepared at the beginning. 

Wis 9:9 With you is Wisdom, she who knows your works, she who was present when you made the world; she 
understands what is pleasing in your eyes and what agrees with your commandments. 

Wis 9:10 Despatch her from the holy heavens, send her forth from your throne of glory to help me and to toil 
with me and teach me what is pleasing to you; 

Wis 9:1 1 since she knows and understands everything she will guide me prudently in my actions and will protect 
me with her glory. 

Wis 9: 1 2 Then all I do will be acceptable, I shall govern your people justly and be worthy of my father’s throne. 
Wis 9:13 “What human being indeed can know the intentions of God? And who can comprehend the will of the 
Lord? 

Wis 9:14 For the reasoning of mortals is inadequate, our attitudes of mind unstable; 



Wis 9: 15 for a perishable body presses down the soul, and this tent of clay weighs down the mind with its many 
cares. 

Wis 9:16 It is hard enough for us to work out what is on earth, laborious to know what lies within our reach; who, 
then, can discover what is in the heavens? 

Wis 9:17 And who could ever have known your will, had you not given Wisdom and sent your holy Spirit from 
above? 

Wis 9:18 Thus have the paths of those on earth been straightened and people have been taught what pleases 
you, and have been saved, by Wisdom”. 

Wis 10:1 It was Wisdom who protected the first man to be fashioned, the father of the world, who had been 
created all alone, she it was who rescued him from his fall 
Wis 10:2 and gave him the strength to subjugate all things. 

Wis 10:3 But when in his wrath a wicked man deserted her, he perished in his fratricidal fury. 

Wis 10:4 When because of him the earth was drowned, it was Wisdom again who saved it, piloting the upright 
man on valueless timber. 

Wis 10:5 Again, when, concurring in wickedness, the nations had been thrown into confusion, she singled out 
the upright man, preserved him blameless before God and fortified him against pity for his child. 

Wis 10:6 She it was who, while the godless perished, saved the upright man as he fled from the fire raining 
down on the Five Cities, 

Wis 10:7 in witness against whose evil ways a desolate land still smokes, where plants bear fruit that never 
ripens and where, monument to an unbelieving soul, there stands a pillar of salt. 

Wis 10:8 For, by ignoring the path of Wisdom, not only did they suffer the loss of not knowing the good, but they 
left the world a memorial to their folly, so that their offences could not pass unnoticed. 

Wis 10:9 But Wisdom delivered her servants from their ordeals. 

Wis 10:10 The upright man, fleeing from the anger of his brother, was led by her along straight paths. She 
showed him the kingdom of God and taught him the knowledge of holy things. She brought him success in his 
labours and gave him full return for all his efforts; 

Wis 10:11 she stood by him against grasping and oppressive men and she made him rich. 

Wis 10:12 She preserved him from his enemies and saved him from the traps they set for him. In an arduous 
struggle she awarded him the prize, to teach him that piety is stronger than all. 

Wis 10:13 She did not forsake the upright man when he was sold, but snatched him away from sin; 

Wis 10:14 she accompanied him down into the pit, nor did she abandon him in his chains until she had brought 
him the sceptre of a kingdom and authority over his despotic masters, thus exposing as liars those who had 
traduced him, and giving him honour everlasting. 

Wis 10:15 It was Wisdom who delivered a holy people, a blameless race, from a nation of oppressors. 

Wis 10:16 She entered the soul of a servant of the Lord, and withstood fearsome kings with wonders and signs. 
Wis 10:17 To the holy people she gave the wages of their labours; she guided them by a marvellous road, 
herself their shelter by day — and their starlight through the night. 

Wis 10:18 She brought them across the Red Sea, leading them through an immensity of water, 

Wis 10:19 whereäs she drowned their enemies, then spat them out from the depths of the abyss. 

Wis 10:20 So the upright despoiled the godless; Lord, they extolled your holy name, and with one accord 
praised your protecting hand; 

Wis 10:21 for Wisdom opened the mouths of the dumb and made eloquent the tongues of babes. 

Wis 11:1 She made their actions successful, by means of a holy prophet. 

Wis 1 1 :2 They journeyed through an unpeopled desert and pitched their tents in inaccessible places. 

Wis 1 1 :3 They stood firm against their enemies, fought off their foes. 

Wis 1 1 :4 On you they called when they were thirsty, and from the rocky cliff water was given them, from hard 
stone a remedy for their thirst. 

Wis 1 1 :5 Thus, what had served to punish their enemies became a benefit for them in their difficulties. 

Wis 1 1 :6 Whereäs their enemies had only the ever-flowing source of a river fouled with mingled blood and mud, 
Wis 11:7 to punish them for their decree of infanticide, you gave your people, against all hope, water in 
abundance, 

Wis 1 1 :8 once you had shown by the thirst that they were experiencing how severely you were punishing their 
enemies. 

Wis 1 1 :9 From their own ordeals, which were only loving correction, they realised how an angry sentence was 
tormenting the godless; 

Wis 11:10 for you had tested your own as a father admonishes, but the others you had punished as a pitiless 
king condemns, 

Wis 11:11 and, whether far or near, they were equally afflicted. 

Wis 11:12 For a double sorrow seized on them, and a groaning at the memory of the past; 



Wis 11:13 when they learned that the punishments they were receiving were beneficial to the others, they 
realised it was the Lord, 

Wis 11:14 while for the man whom long before they had exposed and later mockingly rebuffed, they felt only 
admiration when all was done, having suffered a thirst so different from that of the upright. 

Wis 11:15 For their foolish and wicked notions which led them astray into worshipping mindless reptiles and 
contemptible beetles, you sent a horde of mindless animals to punish them 
Wis 11:16 and to teach them that the agent of sin is the agent of punishment. 

Wis 11:17 And indeed your all-powerful hand which created the world from formless matter, did not lack means 
to unleash a horde of bears or savage lions on them 

Wis 11:18 or unknown beasts, newly created, full of rage, breathing out fire, or puffing out stinking smoke, or 
flashing fearful sparks from their eyes, 

Wis 11:19 beasts able not only to destroy them, being so savage, but even to strike them dead by their terrifying 
appearance. 

Wis 1 1 :20 Flowever, without these, one breath could have blown them over, pursued by Justice, whirled away 
by the breath of your power. You, however, ordered all things by measure, number and weight. 

Wis 1 1 :21 For your great power is always at your service, and who can withstand the might of your arm? 

Wis 1 1 :22 The whole world, for you, can no more than tip a balance, like a drop of morning dew falling on the 
ground. 

Wis 1 1 :23 Yet you are merciful to all, because you are almighty, you overlook people’s sins, so that they can 
repent. 

Wis 1 1 :24 Yes, you love everything that exists, and nothing that you have made disgusts you, since, if you had 
hated something, you would not have made it. 

Wis 1 1 :25 And how could a thing subsist, had you not willed it? Or how be preserved, if not called forth by you? 
Wis 1 1 :26 No, you spare all, since all is yours, Lord, lover of life! 

Wis 12:1 For your imperishable spirit is in everything! 

Wis 12:2 And thus, gradually, you correct those who offend; you admonish and remind them of how they have 
sinned, so that they may abstain from evil and trust in you, Lord. 

Wis 12:3 The ancient inhabitants of your holy land 

Wis 12:4 you hated for their loathsome practices, their acts of sorcery, and unholy rites. 

Wis 12:5 Those ruthless murderers of children, those eaters of entrails at feasts of human flesh and of blood, 
those initiates of secret brotherhoods, 

Wis 12:6 those murderous parents of defenceless beings, you determined to destroy at our ancestors’ hands, 
Wis 12:7 so that this land, dearer to you than any other, might receive a worthy colony of God’s children. 

Wis 12:8 Even so, since these were human, you treated them leniently, sending hornets as forerunners of your 
army, to exterminate them little by little. 

Wis 12:9 Not that you were unable to hand the godless over to the upright in pitched battle or destroy them at 
once by savage beasts or one harsh word; 

Wis 12:10 but, by carrying out your sentences gradually, you gave them a chance to repent, although you knew 
that they were inherently evil, innately wicked, 

Wis 12:11 and fixed in their cast of mind; for they were a race accursed from the beginning. Nor was it from awe 
of anyone that you let their sins go unpunished. 

Wis 12:12 For who is there to ask, “What have you done?”. Or who is there to disagree with your sentence? Who 
to arraign you for destroying nations which you have created? Who to confront you by championing the wicked? 
Wis 12:13 For there is no god, other than you, who cares for every one, to whom you have to prove that your 
sentences have been just. 

Wis 12:14 No more could any king or despot challenge you over those whom you have punished. 

Wis 12:15 For, being upright yourself, you rule the universe uprightly, and hold it as incompatible with your 
power to condemn anyone who has not deserved to be punished. 

Wis 12:16 For your strength is the basis of your saving justice, and your sovereignty over all makes you lenient 
to all. 

Wis 12:17 You show your strength when people will not believe in your absolute power, and you confound any 
insolence in those who do know it. 

Wis 12:18 But you, controlling your strength, are mild in judgement, and govern us with great lenience, for you 
have only to will, and your power is there. 

Wis 12:19 By acting thus, you have taught your people that the upright must be kindly to his fellows, and you 
have given your children the good hope that after sins you will grant repentance. 

Wis 12:20 For, if with such care and indulgence you have punished your children’s enemies, though doomed to 
death, and have given them time and place to be rid of their wickedness, 

Wis 12:21 with what exact attention have you not judged your children, to whose ancestors, by oaths and 



covenants, you made such generous promises? 

Wis 12:22 Thus, you instruct us, when you punish our enemies in moderation, that we should reflect on your 
kindness when we judge, and, when we are judged, we should look for mercy. 

Wis 12:23 And this is why people leading foolish and wicked lives were tortured by you with their own 
abominations; 

Wis 12:24 for they had strayed too far on the paths of error by taking the vilest and most despicable of animals 
for gods, being deluded like silly little children. 

Wis 12:25 So, as to children with no sense, you gave them a sentence making fools of them. 

Wis 12:26 Those, however, who would not take warning from a mocking reproof were soon to endure a 
sentence worthy of God. 

Wis 12:27 The creatures that made them suffer and against which they protested, those very creatures that they 
had taken for gods and by which they were punished they saw in their true light; and he whom hitherto they had 
refused to know, they realised was true God. And this is why the final condemnation fell on them. 

Wis 13:1 Yes, naturally stupid are all who are unaware of God, and who, from good things seen, have not been 
able to discover Him-who-is, or, by studying the works, have not recognised the Artificer. 

Wis 13:2 Fire, however, or wind, or the swift air, the sphere of the stars, impetuous water, heaven’s lamps, are 
what they have held to be the gods who govern the world. 

Wis 13:3 If, charmed by their beauty, they have taken these for gods, let them know how much the Master of 
these excels them, since he was the very source of beauty that created them. 

Wis 13:4 And if they have been impressed by their power and energy, let them deduce from these how much 
mightier is he that has formed them, 

Wis 13:5 since through the grandeur and beauty of the creatures we may, by analogy, contemplate their Author. 
Wis 13:6 Small blame, however, attaches to them, for perhaps they go astray only in their search for God and 
their eagerness to find him; 

Wis 13:7 familiar with his works, they investigate them and fall victim to appearances, seeing so much beauty. 
Wis 13:8 But even so, they have no excuse: 

Wis 13:9 if they are capable of acquiring enough knowledge to be able to investigate the world, how have they 
been so slow to find its Master? 

Wis 13:10 But wretched are they, with their hopes set on dead things, who have given the title of gods to human 
artefacts, gold or silver, skilfully worked, figures of animals, or useless stone, carved by some hand long ago. 

Wis 13:1 1 Take a woodcutter. He fells a suitable tree, neatly strips off the bark all over and then with admirable 
skill works the wood into an object useful in daily life. 

Wis 13:12 The bits left over from his work he uses for cooking his food, then eats his fill. 

Wis 13:13 There is still a good-for-nothing bit left over, a gnarled and knotted billet: he takes it and whittles it 
with the concentration of his leisure hours, he shapes it with the skill of experience, he gives it a human shape 
Wis 13:14 or perhaps he makes it into some vile animal, smears it with ochre, paints its surface red, coats over 
all its blemishes. 

Wis 13:15 He next makes a worthy home for it, lets it into the wall, fixes it with an iron clamp. 

Wis 13:16 Thus he makes sure that it will not fall down — being well aware that it cannot help itself, since it is 
only an image, and needs to be helped. 

Wis 13:17 And yet, if he wishes to pray for his goods, for his marriage, for his children, he does not blush to 
harangue this lifeless thing — for health, he invokes what is weak, 

Wis 13:18 for life, he pleads with what is dead, for help, he goes begging to total inexperience, for a journey, 
what cannot even use its feet, 

Wis 13:19 for profit, an undertaking, and success in pursuing his craft, he asks skill from something whose 
hands have no skill whatever. 

Wis 14:1 Or someöne else, taking ship to cross the wild waves, loudly invokes a piece of wood frailer than the 
vessel that bears him. 

Wis 14:2 Agreed, the ship is the product of a craving for gain, its building embodies the wisdom of the 
shipwright; 

Wis 14:3 but your providence, Father, is what steers it, you having opened a pathway even through the sea, and 
a safe way over the waves, 

Wis 14:4 showing that you can save, whatever happens, so that, even without experience, someöne may put to 
sea. 

Wis 14:5 It is not your will that the works of your Wisdom should be sterile, so people entrust their lives to the 
smallest piece of wood, cross the waves on a raft, yet are kept safe and sound. 

Wis 14:6 Why, in the beginning, when the proud giants were perishing, the hope of the world took refuge on a 
raft and, steered by your hand, preserved the seed of a new generation for the ages to come. 

Wis 14:7 For blessed is the wood which serves the cause of uprightness 



Wis 14:8 but accursed the man-made idol, yes, it and its maker, he for having made it, and it because, though 
perishable, it has been called god. 

Wis 14:9 For God holds the godless and his godlessness in equal hatred; 

Wis 14:10 both work and workman will alike be punished. 

Wis 14:11 Hence even the idols of the nations will have a visitation since, in God’s creation, they have become 
an abomination, a scandal for human souls, a snare for the feet of the foolish. 

Wis 14:12 The idea of making idols was the origin of fornication, their discovery corrupted life. 

Wis 14:13 They did not exist at the beginning, they will not exist for ever; 

Wis 14:14 human vanity brought them into the world, and a quick end is therefore reserved for them. 

Wis 14:15 A father afflicted by untimely mourning has an image made of his child so soon carried off, and now 
pays divine honours to what yesterday was only a corpse, handing on mysteries and ceremonies to his people; 
Wis 14:16 time passes, the custom hardens and is observed as law. 

Wis 14:17 Rulers were the ones who ordered that statues should be worshipped: people who could not honour 
them in person, because they lived too far away, would have a portrait made of their distant countenance, to 
have an image that they could see of the king whom they honoured; meaning, by such zeal, to flatter the absent 
as if he were present. 

Wis 14:18 Even people who did not know him were stimulated into spreading his cult by the artist’s enthusiasm; 
Wis 14:19 for the latter, doubtless wishing to please his ruler, exerted all his skill to surpass the reality, 

Wis 14:20 and the crowd, attracted by the beauty of the work, mistook for a god someöne whom recently they 
had honoured as a man. 

Wis 14:21 And this became a snare for life: that people, whether enslaved by misfortune or by tyranny, should 
have conferred the ineffable Name on sticks and stones. 

Wis 14:22 It is not enough, however, for them to have such misconceptions about God; for, living in the fierce 
warfare of ignorance, they call these terrible evils peace. 

Wis 14:23 With their child-murdering rites, their occult mysteries, or their frenzied orgies with outlandish 
customs, 

Wis 14:24 they no longer retain any purity in their lives or their marriages, one treacherously murdering another 
or wronging him by adultery. 

Wis 14:25 Everywhere a welter of blood and murder, theft and fraud, corruption, treachery, riot, perjury, 

Wis 14:26 disturbance of decent people, forgetfulness of favours, pollution of souls, sins against nature, 
disorder in marriage, adultery and debauchery. 

Wis 14:27 For the worship of idols with no name is the beginning, cause, and end of every evil. 

Wis 14:28 For these people either carry their merrymaking to the point of frenzy, or they prophesy what is not 
true, or they live wicked lives, or they perjure themselves without hesitation; 

Wis 14:29 since they put their trust in lifeless idols they do not reckon their false oaths can harm them. 

Wis 14:30 But they will be justly punished for this double crime: for degrading the concept of God by adhering to 
idols; and for wickedly perjuring themselves in contempt for what is holy. 

Wis 14:31 For it is not the power of the things by which they swear but the punishment reserved for sinners that 
always follows the offences of wicked people. 

Wis 15:1 But you, our God, are kind and true, slow to anger, governing the universe with mercy. 

Wis 15:2 Even if we sin, we are yours, since we acknowledge your power, but we will not sin, knowing we count 
as yours. 

Wis 15:3 To know you is indeed the perfect virtue, and to know your power is the root of immortality. 

Wis 15:4 We have not been duped by inventions of misapplied human skill, or by the sterile work of painters, by 
figures daubed with assorted colours, 

Wis 15:5 the sight of which sets fools yearning and hankering for the lifeless form of an unbreathing image. 

Wis 15:6 Lovers of evil and worthy of such hopes are those who make them, those who want them and those 
who worship them. 

Wis 15:7 Take a potter, now, laboriously working the soft earth, shaping each object for us to use. Out of the 
self-same clay, he models vessels intended for a noble use and those for a contrary purpose, all alike: but which 
of these two uses each will have is for the potter himself to decide. 

Wis 15:8 Then — ill — spent effortl-from the same clay he models a futile god, although so recently made out of 
earth himself and shortly to return to what he was taken from, when asked to give back the soul that has been 
lent to him. 

Wis 15:9 Even so, he does not worry about having to die or about the shortness of his life, but strives to outdo 
the goldsmiths and silversmiths, imitates the bronzeworkers, and prides himself on modelling counterfeits. 

Wis 15:10 Ashes, his heart; more vile than earth, his hope; more wretched than clay, his life! 

Wis 15:11 For he has misconceived the One who has modelled him, who breathed an active soul into him and 
inspired a living spirit. 



Wis 15:12 What is more, he looks on this life of ours as a kind of game, and our time here like a fair, full of 
bargains. “However foul the means”, he says, “a man must make a living”. 

Wis 15:13 He, more than any other, knows he is sinning, he who from one earthy stuff makes both brittle pots 
and idols. 

Wis 15:14 But most foolish, more pitiable even than the soul of a little child, are the enemies who once played 
the tyrant with your people, 

Wis 15:15 and have taken all the idols of the heathen for gods; these can use neither their eyes for seeing nor 
their nostrils for breathing the air nor their ears for hearing nor the fingers on their hands for handling nor their 
feet for walking. 

Wis 15:16 They have been made, you see, by a human being, modelled by a being whose own breath is 
borrowed. No man can model a god to resemble himself; 

Wis 15:17 subject to death, his impious hands can produce only something dead. He himself is worthier than 
the things he worships; he will at least have lived, but never they. 

Wis 15:18 And they worship even the most loathsome of animals, worse than the rest in their degree of 
stupidity, 

Wis 15:19 without a trace of beauty — if that is what is attractive in animals- and excluded from God’s praises 
and blessing. 

Wis 16:1 Thus they were appropriately punished by similar creatures and tormented by swarms of vermin. 

Wis 16:2 In contrast to this punishment, you did your people a kindness and, to satisfy their sharp appetite, 
provided quails — a luscious rarity — for them to eat. 

Wis 16:3 Thus the Egyptians, at the repulsive sight of the creatures sent against them, were to find that, though 
they longed for food, they had lost their natural appetite; whereäs your own people, after a short privation, were 
to have a rare relish for their portion. 

Wis 16:4 Inevitable that relentless want should seize on the former oppressors; enough for your people to be 
shown how their enemies were being tortured. 

Wis 16:5 Even when the fearful rage of wild animals overtook them and they were perishing from the bites of 
writhing snakes, your retribution did not continue to the end. 

Wis 16:6 Affliction struck them briefly, by way of warning, and they had a saving token to remind them of the 
commandment of your Law, 

Wis 16:7 for whoëver turned to it was saved, not by what he looked at, but by you, the Saviour of all. 

Wis 16:8 And by such means you proved to our enemies that you are the one who delivers from every evil; 

Wis 16:9 for them, the bites of locusts and flies proved fatal and no remedy could be found to save their lives, 
since they deserved to be punished by such creatures. 

Wis 16:10 But your children, not even the fangs of poisonous snakes could bring them down; for your mercy 
came to their help and cured them. 

Wis 16:11 One sting - how quickly healed!-to remind them of your pronouncements rather than that, by sinking 
into deep forgetfulness, they should be cut off from your kindness. 

Wis 16:12 No herb, no poultice cured them, but your all-healing word, Lord. 

Wis 16:13 Yes, you are the one with power over life and death, bringing to the gates of Hades and back again. 
Wis 16:14 A human being out of malice may put to death, but cannot bring the departed spirit back or free the 
soul that Hades has once received. 

Wis 16:15 It is not possible to escape your hand. 

Wis 16:16 The godless who refused to acknowledge you were scourged by the strength of your arm, pursued by 
no ordinary rains, hail and unrelenting downpours, and consumed by fire. 

Wis 16:17 Even more wonderful, in the water — which quenches all — the fire raged fiercer than ever; for the 
elements fight for the upright. 

Wis 16:18 At one moment, the fire would die down, to avoid consuming the animals sent against the godless 
and to make clear to them by that sight, that the sentence of God was pursuing them; 

Wis 16:19 at another, in the very heart of the water, it would burn more fiercely than fire to ruin the produce of a 
wicked land. 

Wis 16:20 How differently with your people! You gave them the food of angels, from heaven untiringly providing 
them bread already prepared, containing every delight, to satisfy every taste. 

Wis 16:21 And the substance you gave showed your sweetness towards your children, for, conforming to the 
taste of whoëver ate it, it transformed itself into what each eater wished. 

Wis 16:22 Snow and ice endured the fire, without melting; this was to show them that, to destroy the harvests of 
their enemies, fire would burn even in hail and flare in falling rain, 

Wis 16:23 whereäs, on the other hand, it would even forget its own strength in the service of feeding the upright. 
Wis 16:24 For the creation, being at the service of you, its Creator, tautens to punish the wicked and slackens 
for the benefit of those who trust in you. 



Wis 16:25 And this is why, by changing into all things, it obediently served your all-nourishing bounty, 
conforming to the wishes of those who were in need; 

Wis 16:26 so that your beloved children, Lord, might learn that the various crops are not what provide 
nourishment, but your word which preserves all who believe in you. 

Wis 16:27 For that which fire could not destroy melted in the heat of a single fleeting sunbeam, 

Wis 16:28 to show that, to give you thanks, we must rise before the sun and meet you at the dawning of the 
day; 

Wis 16:29 whereäs the hope of the ungrateful melts like winter frost and flows away like water running to waste. 
Wis 17:1 Yes, your judgements are great and impenetrable, which is why uninstructed souls have gone astray. 
Wis 17:2 While the wicked supposed they had a holy nation in their power, they themselves lay prisoners of the 
dark, in the fetters of long night, confined under their own roofs, banished from eternal providence. 

Wis 17:3 While they thought to remain unnoticed with their secret sins, curtained by dark forgetfulness, they 
were scattered in fearful dismay, terrified by apparitions. 

Wis 17:4 The hiding place sheltering them could not ward off their fear; terrifying noises echoed round them; 
and gloomy, grim-faced spectres haunted them. 

Wis 17:5 No fire had power enough to give them light, nor could the brightly blazing stars illuminate that dreadful 
night. 

Wis 17:6 The only light for them was a great, spontaneous blaze — a fearful sight to see! And in their terror, 
once that sight had vanished, they thought what they had seen more terrible than ever. 

Wis 17:7 Their magical illusions were powerless now, and their claims to intelligence were ignominiously 
confounded; 

Wis 17:8 for those who promised to drive out fears and disorders from sick souls were now themselves sick with 
ludicrous fright. 

Wis 17:9 Even when there was nothing frightful to scare them, the vermin creeping past and the hissing of 
reptiles filled them with panic; 

Wis 17:10 they died convulsed with fright, refusing even to look at empty air, which cannot be eluded anyhow! 
Wis 17:11 Wickedness is confessedly very cowardly, and it condemns itself; under pressure from conscience it 
always assumes the worst. 

Wis 17:12 Fear, indeed, is nothing other than the failure of the help offered by reason; 

Wis 17:13 the less you rely within yourself on this, the more alarming it is not to know the cause of your 
suffering. 

Wis 17:14 And they, all locked in the same sleep, while that darkness lasted — which was in fact quite powerless 
and had issued from the depths of equally powerless Hades- 

Wis 17:15 were now chased by monstrous spectres, now paralysed by the fainting of their souls; for a sudden, 
unexpected terror had attacked them. 

Wis 17:16 And thus, whoëver it might be that fell there stayed clamped to the spot in this prison without bars. 
Wis 17:17 Whether he was ploughman or shepherd, or somebody at work in the desert, he was still overtaken 
and suffered the inevitable fate, for all had been bound by the one same chain of darkness. 

Wis 17:18 The soughing of the wind, the tuneful noise of birds in the spreading branches, the measured beat of 
water in its powerful course, the headlong din of rocks cascading down, 

Wis 17:19 the unseen course of bounding animals, the roaring of the most savage of wild beasts, the echo 
rebounding from the clefts in the mountains, all held them paralysed with fear. 

Wis 17:20 For the whole world shone with the light of day and, unhindered, went about its work; 

Wis 17:21 over them alone there spread a heavy darkness, image of the dark that would receive them. But 
heavier than the darkness was the burden they were to themselves. 

Wis 18:1 For your holy ones, however, there was a very great light. The Egyptians, who could hear them but not 
see them, called them fortunate because they had not suffered too; 

Wis 18:2 they thanked them for doing no injury in return for previous wrongs and asked forgiveness for their 
past ill-will. 

Wis 18:3 In contrast to the darkness, you gave your people a pillar of blazing fire to guide them on their 
unknown journey, a mild sun for their ambitious migration. 

Wis 18:4 But well those others deserved to be deprived of light and imprisoned in darkness, for they had kept in 
captivity your children, by whom the incorruptible light of the Law was to be given to the world. 

Wis 18:5 As they had resolved to kill the infants of the holy ones, and as of those exposed only one child had 
been saved, you punished them by carrying off their horde of children and by destroying them all in the wild 
water. 

Wis 18:6 That night had been known in advance to our ancestors, so that, well knowing him in whom they had 
put their trust, they would be sure of his promises. 

Wis 18:7 Your people thus were waiting both for the rescue of the upright and for the ruin of the enemy; 



Wis 18:8 for by the very vengeance that you exacted on our adversaries, you glorified us by calling us to you. 
Wis 18:9 So the holy children of the good offered sacrifice in secret and with one accord enacted this holy law: 
that the holy ones should share good things and dangers alike; and forthwith they chanted the hymns of the 
ancestors. 

Wis 18:10 In echo came the discordant cries of their enemies, and the pitiful wails of people mourning for their 
children could be heard from far away. 

Wis 18:11 One and the same punishment had struck slave and master alike, and now commoner and king had 
the same sufferings to endure. 

Wis 18:12 Struck by the same death, all had innumerable dead. There were not enough living left to bury them, 
for, at one stroke, the flower of their offspring had perished. 

Wis 18:13 Those whose spells had made them completely incredulous, when faced with the destruction of their 
first-born, acknowledged this people to be child of God. 

Wis 18:14 When peaceful silence lay over all, and night had run the half of her swift course, 

Wis 18:15 down from the heavens, from the royal throne, leapt your all-powerful Word like a pitiless warrior into 
the heart of a land doomed to destruction. Carrying your unambiguous command like a sharp sword, 

Wis 18:16 it stood, and filled the universe with death; though standing on the earth, it touched the sky. 

Wis 18:17 Immediately, dreams and gruesome visions overwhelmed them with terror, unexpected fears 
assailed them. 

Wis 18:18 Hurled down, some here, some there, half dead, they were able to say why they were dying; 

Wis 18:19 for the dreams that had troubled them had warned them why beforehand, so that they should not 
perish without knowing why they were being afflicted. 

Wis 18:20 Experience of death, however, touched the upright too, and a great many were struck down in the 
desert. But the Retribution did not last long, 

Wis 18:21 for a blameless man hurried to their defence. Wielding the weapons of his sacred office, prayer and 
expiating incense, he confronted Retribution and put an end to the plague, thus showing that he was your 
servant. 

Wis 18:22 He overcame Hostility, not by physical strength, nor by force of arms; but by word he prevailed over 
the Punisher, by recalling the oaths made to the Fathers, and the covenants. 

Wis 18:23 Already the corpses lay piled in heaps, when he interposed and beat Retribution back and cut off its 
approach to the living. 

Wis 18:24 For the whole world was on his flowing robe, the glorious names of the Fathers engraved on the four 
rows of stones, and your Majesty on the diadem on his head. 

Wis 18:25 From these the Destroyer recoiled, he was afraid of these. This one experience of Retribution was 
enough. 

Wis 19:1 But the godless were assailed by merciless anger to the very end, for he knew beforehand what they 
would do, 

Wis 19:2 how, after letting his people leave and hastening their departure, they would change their minds and 
give chase. 

Wis 19:3 They were actually still conducting their mourning rites and lamenting at the tombs of their dead, when 
another mad scheme came into their heads and they set out to pursue, as though runaways, the people whom 
they had expelled and begged to go. 

Wis 19:4 A well-deserved fate urged them to this extreme and made them forget what had already happened, 
so that they would add to their torments the one punishment outstanding 

Wis 19:5 and, while your people were experiencing a journey contrary to all expectations, would themselves 
meet an extraordinary death. 

Wis 19:6 For the whole creation, submissive to your commands, had its very nature re-created, so that your 
children should be preserved from harm. 

Wis 19:7 Overshadowing the camp there was the cloud; where there had been water, dry land was seen to rise; 
the Red Sea became an unimpeded way, the tempestuous waves, a green plain; 

Wis 19:8 sheltered by your hand, the whole nation passed across, gazing at these amazing prodigies. 

Wis 19:9 They were like horses at pasture, they skipped like lambs, singing your praises, Lord, their deliverer. 
Wis 19:10 For they still remembered the events of their exile, how the land had bred mosquitoes instead of 
animals and the River had disgorged millions of frogs instead offish. 

Wis 19:11 Later they were to see a new way for birds to come into being, when, goaded by greed, they 
demanded something tasty, 

Wis 19:12 and quails came up out of the sea to satisfy them. 

Wis 19:13 On the sinners, however, punishments rained down not without violent thunder as early warning; and 
they suffered what their own crimes had justly deserved since they had shown such bitter hatred to foreigners. 
Wis 19:14 Others, indeed, had failed to welcome strangers who came to them, but the Egyptians had enslaved 



their own guests and benefactors. 

Wis 19:15 The sinners, moreover, will certainly be punished for it, since they gave the foreigners a hostile 
welcome; 

Wis 19:16 but the latter, having given a festive reception to people who already shared the same rights as 
themselves, later overwhelmed them with terrible labours. 

Wis 19:17 Hence they were struck with blindness, like the sinners at the gate of the upright, when, yawning 
darkness all around them, each had to grope his way through his own door. 

Wis 19:18 A new attuning of the elements occurred, as on a harp the notes may change their rhythm, though all 
the while preserving the same tone; and this is just what happened: 

Wis 19:19 land animals became aquatic, swimming ones took to the land, 

Wis 19:20 fire reinforced its strength in water, and water forgot the power of extinguishing it; 

Wis 19:21 flames, on the other hand, did not char the flesh of delicate animals that ventured into them; nor did 
they melt the heavenly food resembling ice and as easily melted. 

Wis 19:22 Yes, Lord, in every way you have made your people great and glorious; you have never failed to help 
them at any time or place. 

Sir 1:1 [The Law, the Prophets, and the other writers succeeding them have passed on to us great lessons, in 
consequence of which Israel must be commended for learning and wisdom. Furthermore, it is a duty, not only to 
acquire learning by reading, but also, once having acquired it, to make oneself of use to people outsideby what 
one can say or write. My grandfather Jesus, having long devoted himself to the readingof the Law, the 
Prophetsand other books of the Fathersand having become very learned in them, himself decided to write 
something on the subjects of learning and wisdom, so that people who wanted to learn might, by themselves 
accepting these disciplines, learn how better to live according to the Law.You are therefore askedto read this 
bookwith good will and attentionand to show indulgencein those places where, notwithstanding our efforts at 
interpretation, we may seemto have failed to give an adequate rendering of this or that expression;the fact is that 
there is no equivalentfor things originally written in Hebrew when it is a question of translating them into another 
language;what is more, the Law itself, the Prophetsand the other booksdiffer considerably in translation from 
what appears in the original text. It was in the thirty-eighth year of the late King Euergetesthat, coming to Egypt 
and spending some time here, and finding life here consistent with a high degree of wisdom, I became convinced 
of an immediate duty to apply myself in my turn with pains and diligence to the translation of the book that 
follows;and I spent much time and learning on itin the course of this period, to complete the work and to publish 
the bookfor the benefit of those too who, domiciled abroad, wish to study, to reform their behaviour, and to live as 
the Law requires.] All wisdom comes from the Lord, she is with him for ever. 

Sir 1 :2 The sands of the sea, the drops of rain, the days of eternity — who can count them? 

Sir 1 :3 The height of the sky, the breadth of the earth, the depth of the abyss — who can explore them? 

Sir 1 :4 Wisdom was created before everything, prudent understanding subsists from remotest ages. 

Sir 1:5 

Sir 1 :6 For whom has the root of wisdom ever been uncovered? Her resourceful ways, who knows them? 

Sir 1:7 

Sir 1 :8 One only is wise, terrible indeed, 

Sir 1 :9 seated on his throne, the Lord. It was he who created, inspected and weighed her up, and then poured 
her out on all his works- 

Sir 1:10 as much to each living creature as he chose — bestowing her on those who love him. 

Sir 1:11 The fear of the Lord is glory and pride, happiness and a crown of joyfulness. 

Sir 1:12 The fear of the Lord gladdens the heart, giving happiness, joy and long life. 

Sir 1:13 For those who fear the Lord, all will end well: on their dying day they will be blessed. 

Sir 1:14 The basis of wisdom is to fear the Lord; she was created with the faithful in their mothers’ womb; 

Sir 1:15 she has made a home in the human race, an age - old foundation, and to their descendants will she 
faithfully cling. 

Sir 1:16 The fullness of wisdom is to fear the Lord; she intoxicates them with her fruits; 

Sir 1:17 she fills their entire house with treasures and their storerooms with her produce. 

Sir 1:18 The crown of wisdom is to fear the Lord: she makes peace and health flourish. 

Sir 1:19 The Lord has seen and assessed her, he has showered down knowledge and intelligence, he has 
exalted the renown of those who possess her. 

Sir 1 :20 The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and her branches are long life. 

Sir 1:21 

Sir 1 :22 The rage of the wicked cannot put him in the right, for the weight of his rage is his downfall. 

Sir 1 :23 A patient person puts up with things until the right time comes: but his joy will break out in the end. 

Sir 1 :24 Till the time comes he keeps his thoughts to himself, and many a lip will affirm how wise he is. 

Sir 1 :25 Wisdom’s treasuries contain the maxims of knowledge, the sinner, however, holds piety in abhorrence. 



Sir 1 :26 If you desire wisdom, keep the commandments, and the Lord will bestow it on you. 

Sir 1 :27 For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and instruction, and what pleases him is faithfulness and gentleness. 
Sir 1 :28 Do not stand out against fear of the Lord, do not practise it with a double heart. 

Sir 1 :29 Do not act a part in public, keep watch over your lips. 

Sir 1 :30 Do not grow too high and mighty, for fear you fall and cover yourself in disgrace; for the Lord would 
then reveal your secrets and overthrow you before the whole community for not having practised fear of the Lord 
and for having a heart full of deceit. 

Sir 2:1 My child, if you aspire to serve the Lord, prepare yourself for an ordeal. 

Sir 2:2 Be sincere of heart, be steadfast, and do not be alarmed when disaster comes. 

Sir 2:3 Cling to him and do not leave him, so that you may be honoured at the end of your days. 

Sir 2:4 Whatever happens to you, accept it, and in the uncertainties of your humble state, be patient, 

Sir 2:5 since gold is tested in the fire, and the chosen in the furnace of humiliation. 

Sir 2:6 Trust him and he will uphold you, follow a straight path and hope in him. 

Sir 2:7 You who fear the Lord, wait for his mercy; do not turn aside, for fear you fall. 

Sir 2:8 You who fear the Lord, trust him, and you will not be robbed of your reward. 

Sir 2:9 You who fear the Lord, hope for those good gifts of his, everlasting joy and mercy. 

Sir 2:10 Look at the generations of old and see: whoëver trusted in the Lord and was put to shame? Or 
whoëver, steadfastly fearing him, was forsaken? Or whoëver called to him and was ignored? 

Sir 2:1 1 For the Lord is compassionate and merciful, he forgives sins and saves in the time of distress. 

Sir 2:12 Woe to faint hearts and listless hands, and to the sinner who treads two paths. 

Sir 2:13 Woe to the listless heart that has no faith, for such will have no protection. 

Sir 2:14 Woe to you who have lost the strength to endure; what will you do at the Lord’s visitation? 

Sir 2:15 Those who fear the Lord do not disdain his words, and those who love him keep his ways. 

Sir 2:16 Those who fear the Lord do their best to please him, and those who love him will find satisfaction in the 
Law. 

Sir 2:17 Those who fear the Lord keep their hearts prepared and humble themselves in his presence. 

Sir 2:18 Let us fall into the hands of the Lord, not into any human clutches; for as his majesty is, so too is his 
mercy. 

Sir 3:1 Children, listen to me for I am your father: do what I tell you, and so be safe; 

Sir 3:2 for the Lord honours the father above his children and upholds the rights of a mother over her sons. 

Sir 3:3 Whoëver respects a father expiates sins, 

Sir 3:4 whoëver honours a mother is like someöne amassing a fortune. 

Sir 3:5 Whoëver respects a father will in turn be happy with children, the day he prays for help, he will be heard. 
Sir 3:6 Long life comes to anyone who honours a father, whoëver obeys the Lord makes a mother happy. 

Sir 3:7 Such a one serves parents as well as the Lord. 

Sir 3:8 Respect your father in deed as well as word, so that blessing may come on you from him; 

Sir 3:9 since a father’s blessing makes his children’s house firm, while a mother’s curse tears up its foundations. 
Sir 3:10 Do not make a boast of disgrace overtaking your father, your father’s disgrace reflects no honour on 
you; 

Sir 3:1 1 for a person’s own honour derives from the respect shown to his father, and a mother held in dishonour 
is a reproach to her children. 

Sir 3:12 My child, support your father in his old age, do not grieve him during his life. 

Sir 3:13 Even if his mind should fail, show him sympathy, do not despise him in your health and strength; 

Sir 3:14 for kindness to a father will not be forgotten but will serve as reparation for your sins. 

Sir 3:15 On your own day of ordeal God will remember you: like frost in sunshine, your sins will melt away. 

Sir 3:16 Whoëver deserts a father is no better than a blasphemer, and whoëver distresses a mother is accursed 
of the Lord. 

Sir 3:17 My child, be gentle in carrying out your business, and you will be better loved than a lavish giver. 

Sir 3:18 The greater you are, the more humbly you should behave, and then you will find favour with the Lord; 
Sir 3:19 

Sir 3:20 for great though the power of the Lord is, he accepts the homage of the humble. 

Sir 3:21 Do not try to understand things that are too difficult for you, or try to discover what is beyond your 
powers. 

Sir 3:22 Concentrate on what has been assigned you, you have no need to worry over mysteries. 

Sir 3:23 Do not meddle with matters that are beyond you; what you have been taught already exceeds the 
scope of the human mind. 

Sir 3:24 For many have been misled by their own notions, wicked presumption having warped their judgement. 
Sir 3:25 

Sir 3:26 A stubborn heart will come to a bad end, and whoëver dallies with danger will perish in it. 



Sir 3:27 A stubborn heart is weighed down with troubles, the sinner heaps sin on sin. 

Sir 3:28 For the disease of the proud there is no cure, since an evil growth has taken root there. 

Sir 3:29 The heart of the sensible will reflect on parables, an attentive ear is the sage’s dream. 

Sir 3:30 Water puts out a blazing fire, almsgiving expiates sins. 

Sir 3:31 Whoëver gives favours in return is mindful of the future; at the moment of falling, such a person will find 
support. 

Sir 4:1 My child, do not refuse the poor a livelihood, do not tantalise the needy. 

Sir 4:2 Do not add to the sufferings of the hungry, do not bait anyone in distress. 

Sir 4:3 Do not aggravate a heart already angry, nor keep the destitute waiting for your alms. 

Sir 4:4 Do not repulse a hard-pressed beggar, nor turn your face from the poor. 

Sir 4:5 Do not avert your eyes from the needy, give no one occasion to curse you; 

Sir 4:6 for if someöne curses you in distress, his Maker will give ear to the imprecation. 

Sir 4:7 Gain the love of the community, in the presence of the great bow your head. 

Sir 4:8 To the poor lend an ear, and courteously return the greeting. 

Sir 4:9 Save the oppressed from the hand of the oppressor, and do not be mean-spirited in your judgements. 

Sir 4:10 Be like a father to the fatherless and as good as a husband to their mothers. And you will be like a child 
to the Most High, who will love you more than your own mother does. 

Sir 4:1 1 Wisdom brings up her own children and cares for those who seek her. 

Sir 4:12 Whoëver loves her loves life, those who seek her early will be filled with joy. 

Sir 4:13 Whoëver possesses her will inherit honour, and wherever he walks the Lord will bless him. 

Sir 4:14 Those who serve her minister to the Holy One, and the Lord loves those who love her. 

Sir 4:15 Whoëver obeys her rules the nations, whoëver pays attention to her dwells secure. 

Sir 4:16 If he trusts himself to her he will inherit her, and his descendants will remain in possession of her; 

Sir 4:17 for though she takes him at first through winding ways, bringing fear and faintness on him, trying him 
out with her discipline till she can trust him, and testing him with her ordeals, 

Sir 4:18 she then comes back to him on the straight road, makes him happy and reveals her secrets to him. 

Sir 4:19 If he goes astray, however, she abandons him and leaves him to his own destruction. 

Sir 4:20 Take circumstances into account and beware of evil, and have no cause to be ashamed of yourself; 

Sir 4:21 for there is a shame that leads to sin and a shame that is honourable and gracious. 

Sir 4:22 Do not be too severe on yourself, do not let shame lead you to ruin. 

Sir 4:23 Do not refrain from speaking when it will do good, and do not hide your wisdom; 

Sir 4:24 for your wisdom is made known by what you say, your erudition by the words you utter. 

Sir 4:25 Do not contradict the truth, rather blush for your own ignorance. 

Sir 4:26 Do not be ashamed to confess your sins, do not struggle against the current of the river. 

Sir 4:27 Do not grovel to the foolish, do not show partiality to the influential. 

Sir 4:28 Fight to the death for truth, and the Lord God will war on your side. 

Sir 4:29 Do not be bold of tongue, yet idle and slack in deed; 

Sir 4:30 do not be like a lion at home, or cowardly towards your servants. 

Sir 4:31 Do not let your hands be outstretched to receive, yet tight-fisted when the time comes to give back. 

Sir 5:1 Do not put your confidence in your money or say, “With this I am self-sufficient”. 

Sir 5:2 Do not be led by your appetites and energy to follow the passions of your heart. 

Sir 5:3 And do not say, “Who has authority over me?”. for the Lord will certainly give you your deserts. 

Sir 5:4 Do not say, “I have sinned, but what harm has befallen me?”. for the Lord’s forbearance is long. 

Sir 5:5 Do not be so sure of forgiveness that you add sin to sin. 

Sir 5:6 And do not say, “His compassion is great, he will forgive me my many sins”; for with him are both mercy 
and retribution, and his anger does not pass from sinners. 

Sir 5:7 Do not delay your return to the Lord, do not put it off day after day; for suddenly the Lord’s wrath will 
blaze out, and on the day of punishment you will be utterly destroyed. 

Sir 5:8 Do not set your heart on ill-gotten gains, they will be of no use to you on the day of disaster. 

Sir 5:9 Do not winnow in every wind, or walk along every by-way (as the double-talking sinner does). 

Sir 5:10 Be steady in your convictions, and be a person of your word. 

Sir 5:1 1 Be quick to listen, and deliberate in giving an answer. 

Sir 5:12 If you understand the matter, give your neighbour an answer, if not, keep your hand over your mouth. 
Sir 5:13 Both honour and disgrace come from talking, the tongue is its owner’s downfall. 

Sir 5:14 Do not get a name for scandal-mongering, do not set traps with your tongue; for as shame lies in store 
for the thief, so harsh condemnation awaits the deceitful. 

Sir 5:15 Avoid offences in great as in small matters, and do not exchange friendship for enmity, 

Sir 6:1 for a bad name will earn you shame and reproach, as happens to the double-talking sinner. 

Sir 6:2 Do not get carried aloft on the wings of passion, for fear your strength tear itself apart like a bull, 



Sir 6:3 and you devour your own foliage and destroy your own fruit and end by making yourself like a piece of 
dried-up wood. 

Sir 6:4 An evil temper destroys the person who has it and makes him the laughing-stock of his enemies. 

Sir 6:5 A kindly turn of speech attracts new friends, a courteous tongue invites many a friendly response. 

Sir 6:6 Let your acquaintances be many, but for advisers choose one out of a thousand. 

Sir 6:7 If you want to make a friend, take him on trial, and do not be in a hurry to trust him; 

Sir 6:8 for one kind of friend is so only when it suits him but will not stand by you in your day of trouble. 

Sir 6:9 Another kind of friend will fall out with you and to your dismay make your quarrel public, 

Sir 6:10 and a third kind of friend will share your table, but not stand by you in your day of trouble: 

Sir 6:1 1 when you are doing well he will be your second self, ordering your servants about; 

Sir 6:12 but, if disaster befalls you, he will recoil from you and keep out of your way. 

Sir 6:13 Keep well clear of your enemies, and be wary of your friends. 

Sir 6:14 A loyal friend is a powerful defence: whoëver finds one has indeed found a treasure. 

Sir 6:15 A loyal friend is something beyond price, there is no measuring his worth. 

Sir 6:16 A loyal friend is the elixir of life, and those who fear the Lord will find one. 

Sir 6:17 Whoëver fears the Lord makes true friends, for as a person is, so is his friend too. 

Sir 6:18 My child, from your earliest youth choose instruction, and till your hair is white you will keep finding 
wisdom. 

Sir 6:19 Like ploughman and sower, cultivate her and wait for her fine harvest, for in tilling her you will toil a little 
while, but very soon you will be eating her crops. 

Sir 6:20 How very harsh she is to the undisciplined! The senseless does not stay with her for long: 

Sir 6:21 she will weigh as heavily on the senseless as a touchstone and such a person will lose no time in 
throwing her off; 

Sir 6:22 for Wisdom is true to her name, she is not accessible to many. 

Sir 6:23 Listen, my child, and take my advice, do not reject my counsel: 

Sir 6:24 put your feet into her fetters, and your neck into her collar; 

Sir 6:25 offer your shoulder to her burden, do not be impatient of her bonds; 

Sir 6:26 court her with all your soul, and with all your might keep in her ways; 

Sir 6:27 search for her, track her down: she will reveal herself; once you hold her, do not let her go. 

Sir 6:28 For in the end you will find rest in her and she will take the form of joy for you: 

Sir 6:29 her fetters you will find a mighty defence, her collars, a precious necklace. 

Sir 6:30 Her yoke will be a golden ornament, and her bonds be purple ribbons; 

Sir 6:31 you will wear her like a robe of honour, you will put her on like a crown of joy. 

Sir 6:32 If you wish it, my child, you can be taught; apply yourself, and you will become intelligent. 

Sir 6:33 If you love listening, you will learn, if you pay attention, you will become wise. 

Sir 6:34 Attend the gathering of elders; if there is a wise man there, attach yourself to him. 

Sir 6:35 Listen willingly to any discourse coming from God, do not let wise proverbs escape you. 

Sir 6:36 If you see a man of understanding, visit him early, let your feet wear out his doorstep. 

Sir 6:37 Reflect on the injunctions of the Lord, busy yourself at all times with his commandments. He will 
strengthen your mind, and the wisdom you desire will be granted you. 

Sir 7:1 Do no evil, and evil will not befall you; 

Sir 7:2 shun wrong, and it will avoid you. 

Sir 7:3 My child, do not sow in the furrows of wickedness, for fear you have to reap them seven times over. 

Sir 7:4 Do not ask the Lord for the highest place, or the king for a seat of honour. 

Sir 7:5 Do not parade your uprightness before the Lord, or your wisdom before the king. 

Sir 7:6 Do not scheme to be appointed judge, for fear you should not be strong enough to stamp out injustice, 

for fear of being swayed by someöne influential and so of risking the loss of your integrity. 

Sir 7:7 Do not wrong the general body of citizens and so lower yourself in popular esteem. 

Sir 7:8 Do not be drawn to sin twice over, for you will not go unpunished even once. 

Sir 7:9 Do not say, “God will be impressed by my numerous offerings; when I sacrifice to God Most High, he is 

bound to accept”. 

Sir 7:10 Do not be hesitant in prayer; do not neglect to give alms. 

Sir 7:1 1 Do not laugh at someöne who is sad of heart, for he who brings low can lift up high. 

Sir 7:12 Do not make up lies against your brother, nor against a friend either. 

Sir 7:13 Mind you tell no lies, for no good can come of it. 

Sir 7:14 Do not talk too much at the gathering of elders, and do not repeat yourself at your prayers. 

Sir 7:15 Do not shirk tiring jobs or farm work, ordained by the Most High. 

Sir 7:16 Do not swell the ranks of sinners, remember that the retribution will not delay. 

Sir 7:17 Be very humble, since the recompense for the godless is fire and worms. 



Sir 7:18 Do not barter a friend away for the sake of profit, nor a true brother for the gold of Ophir. 

Sir 7:19 Do not turn against a wise and good wife; her gracious presence is worth more than gold. 

Sir 7:20 Do not ill-treat a slave who is an honest worker, or a wage-earner who is devoted to you. 

Sir 7:21 Love an intelligent slave with all your heart, and do not deny such a slave his freedom. 

Sir 7:22 Have you cattle? Look after them; if they are making you a profit, keep them. 

Sir 7:23 Have you children? Educate them, from childhood make them bow the neck. 

Sir 7:24 Have you daughters? Take care of their bodies, but do not be over-indulgent. 

Sir 7:25 Marry a daughter off, and you have finished a great work; but give her to a man of sense. 

Sir 7:26 Have you a wife to your liking? Do not turn her out; but if you do not love her, never trust her. 

Sir 7:27 With all your heart honour your father, never forget the birthpangs of your mother. 

Sir 7:28 Remember that you owe your birth to them; how can you repay them for what they have done for you? 
Sir 7:29 With all your soul, fear the Lord and revere his priests. 

Sir 7:30 With all your might love him who made you, and do not abandon his ministers. 

Sir 7:31 Fear the Lord and honour the priest and give him the portion enjoined on you: first-fruits, sacrifice of 
reparation, shoulder-gift, sanctification sacrifice, first-fruits of the holy things. 

Sir 7:32 And also give generously to the poor, so that your blessing may lack nothing. 

Sir 7:33 Let your generosity extend to all the living, do not withhold it even from the dead. 

Sir 7:34 Do not turn your back on those who weep, but share the grief of the grief-stricken. 

Sir 7:35 Do not shrink from visiting the sick; in this way you will make yourself loved. 

Sir 7:36 In everything you do, remember your end, and you will never sin. 

Sir 8:1 Do not try conclusions with anyone influential, in case you later fall into his clutches. 

Sir 8:2 Do not quarrel with anyone rich, in case he puts his weight against you; for gold has destroyed many, 
and has swayed the hearts of kings. 

Sir 8:3 Do not argue with anyone argumentative, do not pile wood on that fire. 

Sir 8:4 Do not joke with anyone uncouth, for fear of hearing your ancestors insulted. 

Sir 8:5 Do not revile a repentant sinner; remember that we all are guilty. 

Sir 8:6 Do not despise anyone in old age; after all, some of us too are growing old. 

Sir 8:7 Do not gloat over anyone’s death; remember that we all have to die. 

Sir 8:8 Do not scorn the discourse of the wise, but make yourself familiar with their maxims, since from these 
you will learn the theory and the art of serving the great. 

Sir 8:9 Do not dismiss what the old people have to say, for they too were taught by their parents; from them you 
will learn how to think, and the art of the timely answer. 

Sir 8:10 Do not kindle the coals of the sinner, in case you scorch yourself in his blaze. 

Sir 8:11 Refuse to be provoked by the insolent, for fear that such a one try to trap you in your words. 

Sir 8:12 Do not lend to anyone who is stronger than you are — if you do lend, resign yourself to loss. 

Sir 8:13 Do not stand surety beyond your means; if you do stand surety, be prepared to pay up. 

Sir 8:14 Do not go to law with a judge, since judgement will be given in his favour. 

Sir 8:15 Do not go travelling with a rash man, for fear he becomes burdensome to you; he will act as the whim 
takes him, and you will both be ruined by his folly. 

Sir 8:16 Do not argue with a quick-tempered man, do not go with him where there are no other people, since 
blood counts for nothing in his eyes, and where no help is to be had, he will strike you down. 

Sir 8:17 Do not ask a fool for advice, since a fool will not be able to keep a confidence. 

Sir 8:18 In a stranger’s presence do nothing that should be kept secret, since you cannot tell what use the 
stranger will make of it. 

Sir 8:19 Do not open your heart to all comers, nor lay claim to their good offices. 

Sir 9:1 Do not be jealous of the wife you love, do not teach her lessons in how to harm you. 

Sir 9:2 Do not put yourself in a woman’s hands or she may come to dominate you completely. 

Sir 9:3 Do not keep company with a prostitute, in case you get entangled in her snares. 

Sir 9:4 Do not dally with a singing girl, in case you get caught by her wiles. 

Sir 9:5 Do not stare at a pretty girl, in case you and she incur the same punishment. 

Sir 9:6 Do not give your heart to whores, or you will ruin your inheritance. 

Sir 9:7 Keep your eyes to yourself in the streets of a town, do not prowl about its unfrequented quarters. 

Sir 9:8 Turn your eyes away from a handsome woman, do not stare at a beauty belonging to someöne else. 
Because of a woman’s beauty, many have been undone; this makes passion flare up like a fire. 

Sir 9:9 Never sit down with a married woman, or sit at table with her drinking wine, in case you let your heart 
succumb to her and you lose all self-control and slide to disaster. 

Sir 9:10 Do not desert an old friend; the new one will not be his match. New friend, new wine; when it grows old, 
you drink it with pleasure. 

Sir 9:1 1 Do not envy the sinner his success; you do not know how that will end. 



Sir 9:12 Do not take pleasure in what pleases the godless; remember they will not go unpunished here below. 

Sir 9:13 Keep your distance from the man who has the power to put to death, and you will not be haunted by the 
fear of dying. If you do approach him, make no false move, or he may take your life. Realise that you are 
treading among trip-lines, that you are strolling on the battlements. 

Sir 9:14 Cultivate your neighbours to the best of your ability, and consult with the wise. 

Sir 9:15 For conversation seek the intelligent, let all your discussions bear on the law of the Most High. 

Sir 9:16 Have the upright for your table companions, and let your pride be in fearing the Lord. 

Sir 9:17 Work from skilled hands will earn its praise, but a leader of the people must be skilful in words. 

Sir 9:18 A chatterbox is a terror to his town, a loose talker is detested. 

Sir 10:1 A sagacious ruler educates his people, and he makes his subjects understand order. 

Sir 10:2 As the magistrate is, so will his officials be, as the governor is, so will be the inhabitants of his city. 

Sir 10:3 An undisciplined king will be the ruin of his people, a city owes its prosperity to the intelligence of its 
leading men. 

Sir 1 0:4 The government of the earth is in the hands of the Lord, he sets the right leader over it at the right time. 
Sir 10:5 Human success is in the hands of the Lord. He invests the scribe with honour. 

Sir 1 0:6 Do not resent your neighbour’s every offence, and never act in a fit of passion. 

Sir 10:7 Pride is hateful to God and humanity, and injustice is abhorrent to both. 

Sir 10:8 Sovereignty passes from nation to nation because of injustice, arrogance and money. 

Sir 1 0:9 What has dust and ashes to pride itself on? Even in life its entrails are repellent. 

Sir 10:10 A long illness makes a fool of the doctor; a king today is a corpse tomorrow. 

Sir 10:1 1 For in death the portion of all alike will be insects, wild animals and worms. 

Sir 10:12 The first stage of pride is to desert the Lord and to turn one’s heart away from one’s Maker. 

Sir 10:13 Since the first stage of pride is sin, whoëver clings to it will pour forth filth. This is why the Lord inflicts 
unexpected punishments on such people, utterly destroying them. 

Sir 10:14 The Lord has turned mighty princes off their thrones and seated the humble there instead. 

Sir 10:15 The Lord has plucked up the proud by the roots, and planted the lowly in their place. 

Sir 10:16 The Lord has overthrown the lands of the nations and destroyed them to the very foundations of the 
earth. 

Sir 10:17 Sometimes he has taken them away and destroyed them, and blotted out their memory from the earth. 
Sir 10:18 Pride was not created for human beings, nor furious rage for those born of woman. 

Sir 10:19 What race deserves honour? The human race. What race deserves honour? Those who fear the Lord. 
What race deserves contempt? The human race. What race deserves contempt? Those who break the Law. 

Sir 1 0:20 A leader is honoured by his brothers, and those who fear the Lord are honoured by him. 

Sir 10:21 

Sir 10:22 The rich, the noble, the poor, let them pride themselves on fearing the Lord. 

Sir 1 0:23 It is not right to despise one who is poor but intelligent, and it is not good to honour one who is a 
sinner. 

Sir 10:24 Magnate, magistrate, potentate, all are to be honoured, but none is greater than the one who fears the 
Lord. 

Sir 10:25 A wise slave will have free men waiting on him, and the enlightened will not complain. 

Sir 1 0:26 Do not try to be smart when you do your work, do not put on airs when you are in difficulties. 

Sir 10:27 Better the hardworking who has plenty of everything, than the pretentious at a loss for a meal. 

Sir 1 0:28 My child, be modest in your self-esteem, and value yourself at your proper worth. 

Sir 1 0:29 Who can justify one who inflicts injuries on himself, or respect one who is full of self-contempt? 

Sir 1 0:30 The poor is honoured for wit, and the rich for wealth. 

Sir 10:31 Honoured in poverty, how much the more in wealth! Dishonoured in wealth, how much the more in 
poverty! 

Sir 11:1 Wisdom enables the poor to stand erect, and gives to the poor a place with the great. 

Sir 1 1 :2 Do not praise anyone for good looks, nor dislike anyone for mere appearance. 

Sir 1 1 :3 Small among winged creatures is the bee but her produce is the sweetest of the sweet. 

Sir 1 1 :4 Do not grow proud when people honour you; for the works of the Lord are wonderful but hidden from 
human beings. 

Sir 1 1 :5 Many monarchs have been made to sit on the ground, and the person nobody thought of has worn the 
crown. 

Sir 1 1 :6 Many influential people have been utterly disgraced, and prominent people have fallen into the power of 
others. 

Sir 11:7 Do not find fault before making thorough enquiry; first reflect, then give a reprimand. 

Sir 1 1 :8 Listen before you answer, and do not interrupt a speech before it is finished. 

Sir 11:9 Do not wrangle about something that does not concern you, do not interfere in the quarrels of sinners. 



Sir 11:10 My child, do not take on a great amount of business; if you multiply your interests, you are bound to 
suffer for it; hurry as fast as you can, yet you will never arrive, nor will you escape by running away. 

Sir 11:11 Some people work very hard at top speed, only to find themselves falling further behind. 

Sir 11:12 Or there is the slow kind of person, needing help, poor in possessions and rich in poverty; and the 
Lord turns a favourable eye on him, lifts him out of his wretched condition, 

Sir 11:13 and enables him to hold his head high, thus causing general astonishment. 

Sir 11:14 Good and bad, life and death, poverty and wealth, all come from the Lord. 

Sir 11:15 
Sir 11:16 

Sir 11:17 To the devout the Lord’s gift remains constant, and his favour will be there to lead them for ever. 

Sir 11:18 Others grow rich by pinching and scraping, and here is the reward they receive for it: 

Sir 1 1:19 although they say, “Now I can sit back and enjoy the benefit of what I have got”, they do not know how 
long this will last; they will have to leave their goods to others and die. 

Sir 1 1 :20 Stick to your job, work hard at it and grow old at your work. 

Sir 1 1 :21 Do not admire the achievements of sinners, trust the Lord and mind your own business; since it is a 
trifle in the eyes of the Lord, in a moment, suddenly to make the poor rich. 

Sir 1 1 :22 The blessing of the Lord is the reward of the devout, in a moment God brings his blessing to flower. 

Sir 1 1 :23 Do not say, “What are my needs, how much shall I have in the future?”. 

Sir 1 1 :24 And do not say, “I am self-sufficient, what disaster can affect me now?”. 

Sir 1 1 :25 In prosperous times, disasters are forgotten and in times of disaster, no one remembers prosperity. 

Sir 1 1 :26 Yet it is a trifle for the Lord on the day someöne dies to repay him as his conduct deserves. 

Sir 1 1:27 A moment’s adversity, and pleasures are forgotten; in a person’s last hour his deeds will stand 
revealed. 

Sir 1 1 :28 Call no one fortunate before his death; it is by his end that someöne will be known. 

Sir 1 1 :29 Do not bring everyone home with you, for many are the traps of the crafty. 

Sir 1 1 :30 Like a captive partridge in a cage, so is the heart of the proud: like a spy he watches for your downfall, 
Sir 1 1 :31 ever on the look-out, turning good into bad and finding fault with what is praiseworthy. 

Sir 1 1 :32 A hearthful of glowing coals starts from a single spark, and the sinner lurks for the chance to spill 
blood. 

Sir 1 1 :33 Beware of a scoundrel and his evil contrivances, in case he puts a smear on you for ever. 

Sir 1 1 :34 Give a home to a stranger and he will start trouble and estrange you from your own family. 

Sir 12:1 If you mean to do a kindness, choose the right person, then your good deeds will not be wasted. 

Sir 12:2 Do good to someöne devout, and you will be rewarded, if not by that person, then certainly by the Most 
High. 

Sir 12:3 No good will come to one who persists in evil, or who refuses to give alms. 

Sir 12:4 Give to the devout, do not go to the help of a sinner. 

Sir 12:5 Do good to the humble, give nothing to the godless. Refuse him bread, do not give him any, it might 
make him stronger than you are; then you would be repaid evil twice over for all the good you had done him. 

Sir 1 2:6 For the Most High himself detests sinners, and will repay the wicked with what they deserve. 

Sir 12:7 Give to the good, and do not go to the help of a sinner. 

Sir 12:8 In prosperity you cannot always tell a true friend, but in adversity you cannot mistake an enemy. 

Sir 12:9 When someöne is doing well that person’s enemies are sad, when someöne is doing badly, even a 
friend will keep at a distance. 

Sir 12:10 Do not ever trust an enemy; as bronze tarnishes, so does an enemy’s malice. 

Sir 12:1 1 Even if he behaves humbly and comes bowing and scraping, maintain your reserve and be on your 

guard against him. Behave towards him as if you were polishing a mirror, you will find that his tarnish cannot last. 
Sir 12:12 Do not stand him beside you in case he thrusts you out and takes your place. Do not seat him on your 
right, or he will be after your position, and then you will remember what I have said and sadly admit that I was 
right. 

Sir 12:13 Who feels sorry for a snake-charmer bitten by a snake, or for those who take risks with savage 
animals? - 

Sir 12:14 just so for one who consorts with a sinner, and becomes an accomplice in his sins. 

Sir 12:15 He will stay with you for a while, but if you once give way he will press his advantage. 

Sir 12:16 An enemy may have sweetness on his lips, and in his heart a scheme to throw you into the ditch. An 

enemy may have tears in his eyes, but if he gets a chance there can never be too much blood for him. 

Sir 12:17 If you meet with misfortune, you will find him there before you, and, pretending to help you, he will trip 
you up. 

Sir 12:18 He will wag his head and clap his hands, he will whisper a lot and his expression will change. 

Sir 13:1 Whoëver touches pitch will be defiled, and anyone who associates with the proud will come to be like 



them. 

Sir 13:2 Do not try to carry a burden too heavy for you, do not associate with someöne more powerful and 
wealthy than yourself. Why put the clay pot next to the iron cauldron? It will only break when they bang against 
each other. 

Sir 13:3 The rich does wrong and takes a high line; the poor is wronged and has to beg for pardon. 

Sir 1 3:4 If you are useful the rich will exploit you, if you go bankrupt he will desert you. 

Sir 13:5 Are you well off? - he will live with you, he will clean you out without a single qualm. 

Sir 13:6 Does he need you? - he will hoodwink you, smile at you and raise your hopes; he will speak politely to 
you and say, “Is there anything you need?”. 

Sir 1 3:7 He will make you feel small at his dinner parties and, having cleaned you out two or three times over, 
will end by laughing at you. Afterwards, when he sees you, he will avoid you and shake his head about you. 

Sir 13:8 Take care you are not hoodwinked and thus humiliated through your own stupidity. 

Sir 13:9 When an influential person invites you, show reluctance, and he will press his invitation all the more. 

Sir 13:10 Do not thrust yourself forward, in case you are pushed aside, but do not stand aloof, or you will be 
overlooked. 

Sir 13:1 1 Do not affect to treat him as an equal, do not trust his flow of words; since all this talking is expressly 
meant to test you, under cover of geniality he will be weighing you up. 

Sir 13:12 Pitiless is anyone who retails gossip; he will not spare you either blows or chains. 

Sir 13:13 Be wary, take very great care, because you are walking with your own downfall. 

Sir 13:14 

Sir 13:15 Every living thing loves its own sort, and every man his fellow. 

Sir 13:16 Every creature mixes with its kind, and human beings stick to their own sort. 

Sir 13:17 How can wolf and lamb agree? - Just so with sinner and devout. 

Sir 13:18 What peace can there be between hyena and dog? And what peace between rich and poor? 

Sir 13:19 Wild desert donkeys are the prey of lions; so too, the poor is the quarry of the rich. 

Sir 13:20 The proud thinks humility abhorrent; so too, the rich abominates the poor. 

Sir 13:21 When the rich stumbles he is supported by friends; when the poor falls, his friends push him away. 

Sir 13:22 When the rich slips, there are many hands to catch him, if he talks nonsense he is congratulated. The 
poor slips, and is blamed for it, he may talk good sense, but no room is made for him. 

Sir 13:23 The rich speaks and everyone stops talking, and then they praise his discourse to the skies. The poor 
speaks and people say, “Who is this?”. and if he stumbles, they trip him up yet more. 

Sir 13:24 Wealth is good where there is no sin, poverty is evil, the godless say. 

Sir 1 3:25 The heart moulds a person’s expression whether for better or worse. 

Sir 13:26 Happy heart, cheerful expression; but wearisome work, inventing proverbs. 

Sir 14:1 Blessed is anyone who has not sinned in speech and who needs feel no remorse for sins. 

Sir 14:2 Blessed is anyone whose conscience brings no reproach and who has never given up hope. 

Sir 14:3 Wealth is not the right thing for the niggardly, and what use are possessions to the covetous? 

Sir 14:4 Whoëver hoards by stinting himself is hoarding for others, and others will live sumptuously on his 
riches. 

Sir 14:5 If someöne is mean to himself, whom does he benefit? he does not even enjoy what is his own. 

Sir 14:6 No one is meaner than the person who is mean to himself, this is how his wickedness repays him. 

Sir 14:7 If he does any good, he does it unintentionally, and in the end he himself reveals his wickedness. 

Sir 14:8 Wicked the person who has an envious eye, averting his face, and careless of others’ lives. 

Sir 1 4:9 The eye of the grasping is not content with what he has, greed shrivels up the soul. 

Sir 14:10 The miser is grudging of bread, there is famine at his table. 

Sir 14:1 1 My child, treat yourself as well as you can afford, and bring worthy offerings to the Lord. 

Sir 14:12 Remember that death will not delay, and that you have never seen Sheol’s contract. 

Sir 14:13 Be kind to your friend before you die, treat him as generously as you can afford. 

Sir 14:14 Do not refuse yourself the good things of today, do not let your share of what is lawfully desired pass 
you by. 

Sir 14:15 Will you not have to leave your fortune to another, and the fruit of your labour to be divided by lot? 

Sir 14:16 Give and receive, enjoy yourself — there are no pleasures to be found in Sheol. 

Sir 14:17 Like clothes, every body will wear out, the age — old law is, “Everyone must die”. 

Sir 14:18 Like foliage growing on a bushy tree, some leaves falling, others growing, so are the generations of 
flesh and blood: one dies, another is born. 

Sir 14:19 Every achievement rots away and perishes, and with it goes its author. 

Sir 14:20 Blessed is anyone who meditates on wisdom, and reasons with intelligence, 

Sir 14:21 who studies her ways in his heart, and ponders her secrets. 

Sir 14:22 He pursues her like a hunter, and lies in wait by her path; 



Sir 14:23 he peeps in at her windows, and listens at her doors; 

Sir 14:24 he lodges close to her house, and fixes his peg in her walls; 

Sir 14:25 he pitches his tent at her side, and lodges in an excellent lodging; 

Sir 14:26 he sets his children in her shade, and camps beneath her branches; 

Sir 14:27 he is sheltered by her from the heat, and in her glory he makes his home. 

Sir 15:1 Whoëver fears the Lord will act like this, and whoëver grasps the Law will obtain wisdom. 

Sir 15:2 She will come to meet him like a mother, and receive him like a virgin bride. 

Sir 15:3 She will give him the bread of understanding to eat, and the water of wisdom to drink. 

Sir 15:4 He will lean on her and will not fall, he will rely on her and not be put to shame. 

Sir 15:5 She will raise him high above his neighbours, and in full assembly she will open his mouth. 

Sir 15:6 He will find happiness and a crown of joy, he will inherit an everlasting name. 

Sir 1 5:7 Fools will not gain possession of her, nor will sinners set eyes on her. 

Sir 1 5:8 She stands remote from pride, and liars cannot call her to mind. 

Sir 15:9 Praise is unseemly in a sinner’s mouth, since it has not been put there by the Lord. 

Sir 15:10 For praise should be uttered only in wisdom, and the Lord himself then prompts it. 

Sir 15:1 1 Do not say, “The Lord was responsible for my sinning”, for he does not do what he hates. 

Sir 15:12 Do not say, “It was he who led me astray”, for he has no use for a sinner. 

Sir 15:13 The Lord hates all that is foul, and no one who fears him will love it either. 

Sir 15:14 He himself made human beings in the beginning, and then left them free to make their own decisions. 
Sir 15:15 If you choose, you will keep the commandments and so be faithful to his will. 

Sir 15:16 He has set fire and water before you; put out your hand to whichever you prefer. 

Sir 15:17 A human being has life and death before him; whichever he prefers will be given him. 

Sir 15:18 For vast is the wisdom of the Lord; he is almighty and all-seeing. 

Sir 15:19 His eyes are on those who fear him, he notes every human action. 

Sir 15:20 He never commanded anyone to be godless, he has given no one permission to sin. 

Sir 16:1 Do not long fora brood of worthless children, and do not take pleasure in godless sons. 

Sir 1 6:2 However many you have, take no pleasure in them, unless the fear of the Lord lives among them. 

Sir 16:3 Do not count on their having long life, do not put too much faith in their number; for better have one 
than a thousand, better die childless than have children who are godless. 

Sir 1 6:4 One person of sense can populate a city, but a race of lawless people will be destroyed. 

Sir 16:5 My eyes have seen many such things, my ears have heard things even more impressive. 

Sir 16:6 Fire is kindled in a sinful society, Retribution blazes in a rebellious nation. 

Sir 1 6:7 God did not pardon the giants of old who, confident in their strength, had rebelled. 

Sir 16:8 He did not spare the people with whom Lot lived; he abhorred them, rather, for their pride. 

Sir 16:9 He was pitiless to the nation of perdition — those people who gloried in their sins- 

Sir 16:10 as also to the six hundred thousand men on the march, who had banded together in their obstinacy. 

Sir 16:1 1 And had there been only one man stubborn, it would have been amazing had he escaped unpunished, 
since mercy and wrath alike belong to the Lord who is mighty to forgive and to pour out wrath. 

Sir 16:12 As great as his mercy, so is his severity; he judges each person as his deeds deserve: 

Sir 16:13 the sinner will not escape with his ill-gotten gains nor the patience of the devout go for nothing. 

Sir 16:14 He takes note of every charitable action, and everyone is treated as he deserves. 

Sir 16:15 
Sir 16:16 

Sir 16:17 Do not say, “I shall hide from the Lord; who is going to remember me up there? I shall not be noticed 
among so many people; what am I in the immensity of creation?”. 

Sir 16:18 For see, the sky and the heavens above the sky, the abyss and the earth shake at his visitation. 

Sir 16:19 The mountains and earth’s foundations alike quail and tremble when he looks at them. 

Sir 16:20 But to all this no one gives thought. Who keeps his movements in mind? 

Sir 16:21 The storm wind itself is invisible, and most of what he does goes undetected. 

Sir 16:22 “Who will report whether justice has been done? Who will be watching? The covenant is remote!”. 

Sir 1 6:23 Such are the thoughts of the person of little sense, stupid, misguided, cherishing his folly. 

Sir 16:24 Listen to me, my child, and learn knowledge, and give your whole mind to my words. 

Sir 16:25 I shall expound discipline methodically and proclaim knowledge with precision. 

Sir 16:26 When God created his works in the beginning, he assigned them their places as soon as they were 
made. 

Sir 16:27 He determined his works for all time, from their origins to their distant generations. They know neither 
hunger nor weariness, and they never desert their duties. 

Sir 1 6:28 Not one has ever got in the way of another, and they will never disobey his word. 

Sir 16:29 And afterwards the Lord looked at the earth, and filled it with his good things. 



Sir 1 6:30 He covered its surface with every kind of animal, and to it they will return. 

Sir 17:1 The Lord fashioned human beings from the earth, to consign them back to it. 

Sir 17:2 He gave them so many days and so much time, he gave them authority over everything on earth. 

Sir 17:3 He clothed them in strength, like himself, and made them in his own image. 

Sir 17:4 He filled all living things with dread of human beings, making them masters over beasts and birds. 

Sir 17:5 

Sir 17:6 He made them a tongue, eyes and ears, and gave them a heart to think with. 

Sir 17:7 He filled them with knowledge and intelligence, and showed them what was good and what evil. 

Sir 17:8 He put his own light in their hearts to show them the magnificence of his works, 

Sir 17:9 

Sir 17:10 so that they would praise his holy name as they told of his magnificent works. 

Sir 17:1 1 He set knowledge before them, he endowed them with the law of life. 

Sir 17:12 He established an eternal covenant with them, and revealed his judgements to them. 

Sir 17:13 Their eyes saw the majesty of his glory, and their ears heard the glory of his voice. 

Sir 17:14 He said to them, “Beware of all wrong-doing”; he gave each a commandment concerning his 
neighbour. 

Sir 17:15 Their ways are always under his eye, they cannot be hidden from his sight. 

Sir 17:16 

Sir 17:17 Over each nation he has set a governor, but Israel is the Lord’s own portion. 

Sir 17:18 

Sir 17:19 Their actions are all as plain as the sun to him, and his eyes rest constantly on their conduct. 

Sir 17:20 Their iniquities are not hidden from him, all their sins are before the Lord. 

Sir 17:21 

Sir 17:22 Almsgiving is like a signet ring to him, he cherishes generosity like the pupil of an eye. 

Sir 17:23 One day he will rise and reward them, he will repay their deserts on their own heads. 

Sir 17:24 But to those who repent he permits return, and he encourages those who have lost hope. 

Sir 17:25 Return to the Lord and renounce your sins, plead before his face, stop offending him. 

Sir 17:26 Come back to the Most High, turn away from iniquity and hold all that is foul in abhorrence. 

Sir 17:27 Who is going to praise the Most High in Sheol if we do not glorify him while we are alive? 

Sir 17:28 The dead can praise no more than those who do not exist, only those with life and health can praise 
the Lord. 

Sir 17:29 How great is the mercy of the Lord, his pardon for those who turn to him! 

Sir 17:30 For we cannot have everything, human beings are not immortal. 

Sir 17:31 What is brighter than the sun? And yet it fades. Flesh and blood think of nothing but evil. 

Sir 17:32 He surveys the armies of the lofty sky, and all of us are only dust and ashes. 

Sir 18:1 He who lives for ever has created the sum of things. 

Sir 18:2 The Lord alone will be found just. 

Sir 18:3 

Sir 18:4 He has given no one the power to proclaim his works to the end, and who can fathom his magnificent 
deeds? 

Sir 18:5 Who can assess his magnificent strength, and who can go further and tell all of his mercies? 

Sir 18:6 Nothing can be added to them, nothing subtracted, it is impossible to fathom the marvels of the Lord. 

Sir 18:7 When someöne finishes he is only beginning, and when he stops he is as puzzled as ever. 

Sir 18:8 What is a human being, what purpose does he serve? What is good and what is bad for him? 

Sir 18:9 The length of his life: a hundred years at most. 

Sir 18:10 Like a drop of water from the sea, or a grain of sand, such are these few years compared with eternity. 
Sir 18:1 1 This is why the Lord is patient with them and pours out his mercy on them. 

Sir 18:12 He sees and recognises how wretched their end is, and so he makes his forgiveness the greater. 

Sir 18:13 Human compassion extends to neighbours, but the Lord’s compassion extends to everyone; rebuking, 
correcting and teaching, bringing them back as a shepherd brings his flock. 

Sir 18:14 He has compassion on those who accept correction, and who fervently search for his judgements. 

Sir 18:15 My child, do not temper your favours with blame nor any of your gifts with words that hurt. 

Sir 18:16 Does not dew relieve the heat? In the same way a word is worth more than a gift. 

Sir 18:17 Why surely, a word is better than a good present, but a generous person is ready with both. 

Sir 18:18 A fool will offer nothing but insult, and a grudging gift makes the eyes smart. 

Sir 18:19 Learn before you speak, take care of yourself before you fall ill. 

Sir 1 8:20 Examine yourself before judgement comes, and on the day of visitation you will be acquitted. 

Sir 18:21 Humble yourself before you fall ill, repent as soon as the sin is committed. 

Sir 18:22 Let nothing prevent your discharging a vow in good time, and do not wait till death to set matters right. 



Sir 18:23 Prepare yourself before making a vow, and do not be like someöne who tempts the Lord. 

Sir 18:24 Bear in mind the retribution of the last days, the time of vengeance when God averts his face. 

Sir 1 8:25 In a time of plenty remember times of famine, think of poverty and want when you are rich. 

Sir 1 8:26 The time slips by between dawn and dusk, everything passes quickly for the Lord. 

Sir 18:27 The wise will be cautious in everything, in sinful times will take care not to offend. 

Sir 18:28 Every person of sense recognises wisdom, and will respect anyone who has found her. 

Sir 18:29 Those who understand sayings have toiled for their wisdom and have poured out accurate maxims. 

Sir 18:30 Do not be governed by your passions, restrain your desires. 

Sir 1 8:31 If you allow yourself to satisfy your desires, this will make you the laughing-stock of your enemies. 

Sir 18:32 Do not indulge in luxurious living, do not get involved in such society. 

Sir 18:33 Do not beggar yourself by banqueting on credit when there is nothing in your pocket. 

Sir 19:1 A drunken workman will never grow rich, and one who makes light of small matters will gradually sink. 
Sir 19:2 Wine and women corrupt intelligent men, the customer of whores loses all sense of shame. 

Sir 19:3 Grubs and worms will have him as their legacy, and the man who knows no shame will lose his life. 

Sir 19:4 Being too ready to trust shows shallowness of mind, and sinning harms the sinner. 

Sir 19:5 Taking pleasure in evil earns condemnation; 

Sir 19:6 by hating gossip one avoids evil. 

Sir 19:7 Never repeat what you are told and you will come to no harm; 

Sir 1 9:8 whether to friend or foe, do not talk about it, unless it would be sinful not to, do not reveal it; 

Sir 19:9 you would be heard out, then mistrusted, and in due course you would be hated. 

Sir 19:10 Have you heard something? Let it die with you. Courage! It will not burst you! 

Sir 19:1 1 A fool will suffer birthpangs over a piece of news, like a woman labouring with child. 

Sir 19:12 Like an arrow stuck in the flesh of the thigh, so is a piece of news inside a fool. 

Sir 19:13 Question your friend, he may have done nothing at all; and if he has done anything, he will not do it 
again. 

Sir 19:14 Question your neighbour, he may have said nothing at all; and if he has said anything, he will not say 
it again. 

Sir 19:15 Question your friend, for slander is very common, do not believe all you hear. 

Sir 19:16 People sometimes make a slip, without meaning what they say; and which of us has never sinned by 
speech? 

Sir 19:17 Question your neighbour before you threaten him, and defer to the Law of the Most High. 

Sir 19:18 
Sir 19:19 

Sir 19:20 Wisdom consists entirely in fearing the Lord, and wisdom is entirely constituted by the fulfilling of the 
Law. 

Sir 19:21 

Sir 19:22 Being learned in evil, however, is not wisdom, there is no prudence in the advice of sinners. 

Sir 19:23 There is a cleverness that is detestable; whoëver has no wisdom is a fool. 

Sir 1 9:24 Better be short of sense and full of fear, than abound in shrewdness and violate the Law. 

Sir 19:25 There is a wickedness which is scrupulous but nonetheless dishonest, and there are those who 
misuse kindness to win their case. 

Sir 19:26 There is the person who will walk bowed down with grief, when inwardly this is nothing but deceit: 

Sir 19:27 he hides his face and pretends to be deaf, if he is not unmasked, he will take advantage of you. 

Sir 19:28 There is the person who is prevented from sinning by lack of strength, yet he will do wrong when he 
gets the chance. 

Sir 19:29 You can tell a person by his appearance, you can tell a thinker by the look on his face. 

Sir 19:30 The way a person dresses, the way he laughs, the way he walks, tell you what he is. 

Sir 20:1 There is the rebuke that is untimely, and there is the person who keeps quiet, and he is the shrewd one. 
Sir 20:2 But how much better to rebuke than to fume! 

Sir 20:3 The person who acknowledges a fault wards off punishment. 

Sir 20:4 Like a eunuch trying to take a girl’s virginity is someöne who tries to impose justice by force. 

Sir 20:5 There is the person who keeps quiet and is considered wise, another incurs hatred for talking too much. 
Sir 20:6 There is the person who keeps quiet, not knowing how to answer, another keeps quiet, knowing when 
to speak. 

Sir 20:7 The wise will keep quiet till the right moment, but a garrulous fool will always misjudge it. 

Sir 20:8 Someöne who talks too much will earn dislike, and someöne who usurps authority will earn hatred. 

Sir 20:9 There is the person who finds misfortune a boon, and the piece of luck that turns to loss. 

Sir 20:10 There is the gift that affords you no profit, and the gift that repays you double. 

Sir 20:1 1 There is the honour that leads to humiliation, and there are people in a low state who raise their 



heads. 

Sir 20:12 There is the person who buys much for little, yet pays for it seven times over. 

Sir 20:13 The wise wins love with words, while fools may shower favours in vain. 

Sir 20:14 The gift of the stupid will bring you no advantage, his eyes look for seven times as much in return. 

Sir 20:15 He gives little and reviles much, he opens his mouth like the town crier, he lends today and demands 
payment tomorrow; he is a detestable fellow. 

Sir 20:16 The fool will say, “I have no friends, I get no gratitude for my good deeds; 

Sir 20:17 those who eat my bread have malicious tongues”. How often he will be laughed at, and by how many! 
Sir 20:18 Better a slip on the pavement than a slip of the tongue; this is how ruin takes the wicked by surprise. 
Sir 20:19 A coarse-grained person is like an indiscreet story endlessly retold by the ignorant. 

Sir 20:20 A maxim is rejected when coming from a fool, since the fool does not utter it on the apt occasion. 

Sir 20:21 There is a person who is prevented from sinning by poverty; no qualms of conscience disturb that 
person’s rest. 

Sir 20:22 There is a person who courts destruction out of false shame, courts destruction for the sake of a fool’s 
opinion. 

Sir 20:23 There is a person who out of false shame makes promises to a friend, and so makes an enemy for 
nothing. 

Sir 20:24 Lying is an ugly blot on anyone, and ever on the lips of the undisciplined. 

Sir 20:25 A thief is preferable to an inveterate liar, but both are heading for ruin. 

Sir 20:26 Lying is an abominable habit, the liar’s disgrace lasts for ever. 

Sir 20:27 The wise gains advancement by words, the shrewd wins favour from the great. 

Sir 20:28 Whoëver tills the soil will have a full harvest, whoëver wins favour from the great will secure pardon for 
offences. 

Sir 20:29 Presents and gifts blind the eyes of the wise and stifle rebukes like a muzzle on the mouth. 

Sir 20:30 Wisdom concealed, and treasure undiscovered, what use is either of these? 

Sir 20:31 Better one who conceals his folly than one who conceals his wisdom. 

Sir 21:1 My child, have you sinned? Do so no more, and ask forgiveness for your previous faults. 

Sir 21 :2 Flee from sin as from a snake, if you approach it, it will bite you; its teeth are lion’s teeth, they take 
human life away. 

Sir 21 :3 All law-breaking is like a two-edged sword, the wounds it inflicts are beyond cure. 

Sir 21 :4 Terror and violence make havoc of riches, similarly, desolation overtakes the houses of the proud. 

Sir 21 :5 A plea from the mouth of the poor goes straight to the ear of God, whose judgement comes without 
delay. 

Sir 21 :6 Whoëver resents reproof walks in the sinner’s footsteps; whoëver fears the Lord is repentant of heart. 
Sir 21 :7 The glib speaker is known far and wide, but the wary detects every slip. 

Sir 21 :8 To build your house with other people’s money is like collecting stones for your own tomb. 

Sir 21 :9 A meeting of the lawless is like a heap of tow: they will end in a blazing fire. 

Sir 21:10 The sinner’s road is smoothly paved, but it ends at the pit of Sheol. 

Sir 21:11 Whoëver keeps the Law will master his instincts; the fear of the Lord is made perfect in wisdom. 

Sir 21:12 No one who lacks aptitude can be taught, but certain aptitudes give rise to bitterness. 

Sir 21:1 3 The sage’s knowledge is as rich as the abyss and his advice is like a living spring. 

Sir 21:14 The heart of a fool is like a broken jar, it will not hold any knowledge. 

Sir 21:1 5 If the educated hears a wise saying, he praises it and caps it with another; if a debauchee hears it, he 
does not like it and tosses it behind his back. 

Sir 21:16 The talk of a fool is like a load on a journey, but it is a pleasure to listen to the intelligent. 

Sir 21:1 7 The utterance of the shrewd will be eagerly awaited in the assembly, what he says will be given 
serious consideration. 

Sir 21:18 The wisdom of a fool is like the wreckage of a house, the knowledge of a dolt is incoherent talk. 

Sir 21:19 To the senseless fellow instruction is like fetters on the feet, like manacles on the right hand. 

Sir 21 :20 A fool laughs at the top of his voice, but the intelligent quietly smiles. 

Sir 21 :21 To the shrewd instruction is like a golden ornament, like a bracelet on the right arm. 

Sir 21 :22 The step of a fool goes straight into a house, but a person of much experience makes a respectful 
approach; 

Sir 21 :23 the stupid peeps inside through the door, a well-bred person waits outside. 

Sir 21 :24 Listening at doors is a sign of bad upbringing, the perceptive would be ashamed to do so. 

Sir 21 :25 The lips of gossips repeat the words of others, the words of the wise are carefully weighed. 

Sir 21 :26 The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their heart. 

Sir 21 :27 When the godless curses Satan, he is cursing himself. 

Sir 21 :28 The scandal-monger sullies himself and earns the hatred of the neighbourhood. 



Sir 22:1 An idler is like a stone covered in filth, everyone whistles at his disgrace. 

Sir 22:2 An idler is like a lump of dung, anyone picking it up shakes it off his hand. 

Sir 22:3 It is a disgrace to have fathered a badly brought-up son, but the birth of any daughter is a loss; 

Sir 22:4 a sensible daughter will find a husband, but a shameless one is a grief to her father. 

Sir 22:5 A brazen daughter puts father and mother to shame, and will be disowned by both. 

Sir 22:6 An untimely remonstrance is like music at a funeral, but a thrashing and correction are wisdom at all 
times. 

Sir 22:7 
Sir 22:8 

Sir 22:9 Teaching a fool is like gluing bits of pottery together — you are rousing someöne who is besotted with 
sleep. 

Sir 22:10 You might as well talk to someöne sound asleep; when you have finished the fool will say, “What’s 
up?”. 

Sir 22:1 1 Shed tears for the dead, who has left the light behind; shed tears for the fool, who has left his wits 
behind. Shed quieter tears for the dead who is at rest, for the fool life is worse than death. 

Sir 22:12 Mourning for the dead lasts seven days, for the foolish and ungodly all the days of their lives. 

Sir 22:13 Do not waste many words on the stupid, do not go near a dolt. Beware of him, or you will have trouble 
and be soiled by contact with him; keep away from him, and you will have peace of mind and not be exasperated 
by his folly. 

Sir 22:14 What is heavier than lead, and what is its name if not “fool'? 

Sir 22:15 Sand and salt and a lump of iron are a lighter burden than a dolt. 

Sir 22:16 A tie-beam bonded into a building will not be dislodged by an earthquake; so too, a heart resolved 
after due reflection will not flinch at the critical moment. 

Sir 22:17 A heart founded on intelligent reflection is like a stucco decoration on a smooth wall. 

Sir 22:18 Pebbles placed on top of a wall will not stand up to the wind; no more can the heart of a fool frightened 

at his own thoughts stand up to fear. 

Sir 22:19 Prick an eye and you will draw a tear, prick a heart and you reveal its feelings. 

Sir 22:20 Throw stones at birds and you scare them away, reproach a friend and you destroy a friendship. 

Sir 22:21 If you have drawn your sword on a friend, do not despair; there is a way back. 

Sir 22:22 If you have opened your mouth against your friend, do not worry; there is hope for reconciliation; but 
insult, arrogance, betrayal of secrets, and the stab in the back — in these cases any friend is lost. 

Sir 22:23 Win your neighbour’s confidence when he is poor, so that you may enjoy his later good fortune with 
him; stand by him in times of trouble, in order to have your share when he comes into a legacy. 

Sir 22:24 Fire is heralded by the reek of the furnace and smoke, so too, bloodshed by insults. 

Sir 22:25 I shall not be ashamed to shelter a friend nor shall I hide away from him, 

Sir 22:26 and if evil comes to me through him, everyone who hears about it will beware of him. 

Sir 22:27 Who will set a guard on my mouth, and an efficient seal on my lips, to keep me from falling, and my 
tongue from causing my ruin? 

Sir 23:1 Lord, father and master of my life, do not abandon me to their whims, do not let me fall because of 
them. 

Sir 23:2 Who will lay whips to my thoughts, and the discipline of wisdom to my heart, to be merciless to my 
errors and not let my sins go unchecked, 

Sir 23:3 for fear my errors should multiply and my sins then abound and I fall before my adversaries, and my 
enemy gloat over me? 

Sir 23:4 Lord, father and God of my life, do not let my eyes be proud, 

Sir 23:5 turn envy away from me, 

Sir 23:6 do not let lechery and lust grip me, do not leave me a prey to shameless desire. 

Sir 23:7 Children, listen to what I teach, no one who keeps it will be caught out. 

Sir 23:8 The sinner is ensnared by his own lips, both the abusive and the proud are tripped by them. 

Sir 23:9 Do not get into the habit of swearing, do not make a habit of naming the Holy One; 

Sir 23:10 for just as a slave who is constantly overseen will never be without bruises, so someöne who is always 
swearing and uttering the Name will not be exempt from sin. 

Sir 23:1 1 A man for ever swearing is full of iniquity, and the scourge will not depart from his house. If he offends, 
his sin will be on him, if he did it unheedingly, he has doubly sinned; if he swears a false oath, he will not be 
treated as innocent, for his house will be filled with calamities. 

Sir 23:12 One way of talking is like death, let it not be found in the heritage of Jacob since devout people have 
nothing to do with that: they will not wallow in sin. 

Sir 23:13 Do not get into the habit of using coarse and foul language since this involves sinful words. 

Sir 23:14 Remember your father and mother when you are sitting with the great, for fear you forget yourself in 



their presence and behave like a fool, and then wish you had not been born and curse the day of your birth. 

Sir 23:15 No one in the habit of using shameful language will break himself of it as long as he lives. 

Sir 23:16 There are two types of people who commit sin after sin and a third who attracts retribution- 
Sir 23:17 desire, blazing like a furnace, will not die down until it has been sated- the man who lusts after 
members of his own family is not going to stop until he is quite burnt out; every food is sweet to the promiscuous, 
and he will not desist until he dies; 

Sir 23:18 and the man who sins against the marriage bed and says to himself, “Who can see me? There is 
darkness all round me, the walls hide me, no one can see me, why should I worry? The Most High will not 
remember my sins”. 

Sir 23:19 What he fears are human eyes, he does not realise that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times 
brighter than the sun, observing every aspect of human behaviour, seeing into the most secret corners. 

Sir 23:20 All things were known to him before they were created, and are still, now that they are finished. 

Sir 23:21 This man will be punished in view of the whole town, and will be seized when he least expects it. 

Sir 23:22 Similarly the woman unfaithful to her husband, who provides him with an heir by another man: 

Sir 23:23 first, she has disobeyed the Law of the Most High; secondly, she has been false to her husband; and 
thirdly, she has gone whoring in adultery 

Sir 23:24 and conceived children by another man. She will be led before the assembly, an enquiry will be held 
about her children. 

Sir 23:25 Her children will strike no root, her branches will bear no fruit. 

Sir 23:26 She will leave an accursed memory behind her, her shame will never be wiped out. 

Sir 23:27 And those who survive her will recognise that nothing is better than fearing the Lord, and nothing 
sweeter than adherence to the Lord’s commandments. 

Sir 24:1 Wisdom speaks her own praises, in the midst of her people she glories in herself. 

Sir 24:2 She opens her mouth in the assembly of the Most High, she glories in herself in the presence of the 
Mighty One: 

Sir 24:3 “I came forth from the mouth of the Most High, and I covered the earth like mist. 

Sir 24:4 I had my tent in the heights, and my throne was a pillar of cloud. 

Sir 24:5 Alone, I have made the circuit of the heavens and walked through the depths of the abyss. 

Sir 24:6 Over the waves of the sea and over the whole earth, and over every people and nation I have held 
sway. 

Sir 24:7 Among all these I searched for rest, and looked to see in whose territory I might pitch camp. 

Sir 24:8 Then the Creator of all things instructed me and he who created me fixed a place for my tent. He said, 
‘Pitch your tent in Jacob, make Israel your inheritance’. 

Sir 24:9 From eternity, in the beginning, he created me, and for eternity I shall remain. 

Sir 24:10 In the holy tent I ministered before him and thus became established in Zion. 

Sir 24:1 1 In the beloved city he has given me rest, and in Jerusalem I wield my authority. 

Sir 24:12 I have taken root in a privileged people, in the Lord’s property, in his inheritance. 

Sir 24:13 I have grown tall as a cedar on Lebanon, as a cypress on Mount Hermon; 

Sir 24:14 I have grown tall as a palm in En-Gedi, as the rose bushes of Jericho; as a fine olive in the plain, as a 
plane tree, I have grown tall. 

Sir 24:15 Like cinnamon and acanthus, I have yielded a perfume, like choice myrrh, have breathed out a scent, 
like galbanum, onycha, labdanum, like the smoke of incense in the tent. 

Sir 24:16 I have spread my branches like a terebinth, and my branches are glorious and graceful. 

Sir 24:17 I am like a vine putting out graceful shoots, my blossoms bear the fruit of glory and wealth. 

Sir 24:18 

Sir 24:19 Approach me, you who desire me, and take your fill of my fruits, 

Sir 24:20 for memories of me are sweeter than honey, inheriting me is sweeter than the honeycomb. 

Sir 24:21 They who eat me will hunger for more, they who drink me will thirst for more. 

Sir 24:22 No one who obeys me will ever have to blush, no one who acts as I dictate will ever sin”. 

Sir 24:23 All this is no other than the Book of the Covenant of the Most High God, the Law that Moses enjoined 
on us, an inheritance for the communities of Jacob. 

Sir 24:24 

Sir 24:25 This is what makes wisdom brim over like the Pishon, like the Tigris in the season of fruit, 

Sir 24:26 what makes intelligence overflow like the Euphrates, like the Jordan at harvest time; 

Sir 24:27 and makes discipline flow like the Nile, like the Gihon when the grapes are harvested. 

Sir 24:28 The first man did not finish discovering about her, nor has the most recent tracked her down; 

Sir 24:29 for her thoughts are wider than the sea, and her designs more profound than the abyss. 

Sir 24:30 And I, like a conduit from a river, like a watercourse running into a garden, 

Sir 24:31 I said, “I am going to water my orchard, I intend to irrigate my flower beds”. And see, my conduit has 



grown into a river, and my river has grown into a sea. 

Sir 24:32 Making discipline shine forth from daybreak, I shall send its light far and wide. 

Sir 24:33 I shall pour out teaching like prophecy, as a legacy to all future generations. 

Sir 24:34 And note, I have been working not merely for myself, but for all who are seeking wisdom. 

Sir 25:1 There are three things my soul delights in, and which are delightful to God and to all people: concord 
between brothers, friendship between neighbours, and a wife and husband who live happily together. 

Sir 25:2 There are three sorts of people my soul hates, and whose existence I consider an outrage: the poor 
swollen with pride, the rich who is a liar and an adulterous old man who has no sense. 

Sir 25:3 If you have gathered nothing in your youth, how can you discover anything in your old age? 

Sir 25:4 How fine a thing: sound judgement with grey hairs, and for greybeards to know how to advise! 

Sir 25:5 How fine a thing: wisdom in the aged, and considered advice coming from people of distinction! 

Sir 25:6 The crown of the aged is ripe experience, their glory, the fear of the Lord. 

Sir 25:7 There are nine things I can think of which strike me as happy, and a tenth which is now on my tongue: 
the man who can be proud of his children, he who lives to see the downfall of his enemies; 

Sir 25:8 happy is he who keeps house with a sensible wife; he who does not toil with ox and donkey; he who 
has never sinned with his tongue; he who does not serve a man less worthy than himself; 

Sir 25:9 happy is he who has acquired good sense and can find attentive ears for what he has to say; 

Sir 25:10 how great is he who has acquired wisdom; but unsurpassed is one who fears the Lord. 

Sir 25:1 1 The fear of the Lord surpasses everything; what can compare with someöne who has mastered that? 
Sir 25:12 

Sir 25:13 Any wound rather than a wound of the heart! Any spite rather than the spite of woman! 

Sir 25:14 Any evil rather than an evil caused by an enemy! Any vengeance rather than the vengeance of a foe! 
Sir 25:15 There is no poison worse than the poison of a snake, there is no fury worse than the fury of an enemy. 
Sir 25:16 I would sooner keep house with a lion or a dragon than keep house with a spiteful wife. 

Sir 25:17 A woman’s spite changes her appearance and makes her face as grim as a bear’s. 

Sir 25:18 When her husband goes out to dinner with his neighbours, he cannot help heaving bitter sighs. 

Sir 25:19 No spite can approach the spite of a woman, may a sinner’s lot be hers! 

Sir 25:20 Like the climbing of a sandhill for elderly feet, such is a garrulous wife for a quiet husband. 

Sir 25:21 Do not be taken in by a woman’s beauty, never lose your head over a woman. 

Sir 25:22 Bad temper, insolence and shame hold sway where the wife supports the husband. 

Sir 25:23 Low spirits, gloomy face, stricken heart: such is a spiteful wife. Slack hands and sagging knees: such 
is the wife who does not make her husband happy. 

Sir 25:24 Sin began with a woman, and thanks to her we must all die. 

Sir 25:25 Do not let water find a leak, nor a spiteful woman give free rein to her tongue. 

Sir 25:26 If she will not do as you tell her, get rid of her. 

Sir 26:1 How blessed is the husband of a really good wife; the number of his days will be doubled. 

Sir 26:2 A perfect wife is the joy of her husband, he will live out the years of his life in peace. 

Sir 26:3 A good wife is the best of portions, reserved for those who fear the Lord; 

Sir 26:4 rich or poor, their hearts will be glad, their faces cheerful, whatever the season. 

Sir 26:5 There are three things that I dread, and a fourth which terrifies me: slander by a whole town, the 
gathering of a mob, and a false accusation — these are all worse than death; 

Sir 26:6 but a woman jealous of a woman means heartbreak and sorrow, and all this is the scourge of the 
tongue. 

Sir 26:7 A bad wife is a badly fitting ox-yoke, trying to master her is like grasping a scorpion. 

Sir 26:8 A drunken wife will goad anyone to fury, she cannot conceal her own degradation. 

Sir 26:9 A woman’s wantonness shows in her wide-eyed look, her eyelashes leave no doubt. 

Sir 26:10 Keep a headstrong daughter under firm control, or, feeling free, she will take advantage of it. 

Sir 26:1 1 Keep a strict watch on her shameless eye, do not be surprised if she disgraces you. 

Sir 26:12 Like a thirsty traveller she will open her mouth and drink any water she comes across; she will sit 
down in front of every tent-peg and open her quiver to any arrow. 

Sir 26:13 The grace of a wife will charm her husband, her understanding will make him the stronger. 

Sir 26:14 A silent wife is a gift from the Lord, no price can be put on a well-trained character. 

Sir 26:15 A modest wife is a boon twice over, a chaste character cannot be over-valued. 

Sir 26:16 Like the sun rising over the mountains of the Lord, such is the beauty of a good wife in a well-run 
house. 

Sir 26:17 Like a lamp shining on the sacred lamp-stand, such is a beautiful face on a well-proportioned body. 

Sir 26:18 Like golden pillars on a silver base, such are shapely legs on firm-set heels. 

Sir 26:19 
Sir 26:20 



Sir 26:21 
Sir 26:22 
Sir 26:23 
Sir 26:24 
Sir 26:25 
Sir 26:26 
Sir 26:27 

Sir 26:28 There are two things which grieve my heart and a third arouses my anger: a warrior wasting away 
through poverty, the intelligent treated with contempt, someöne turning back from virtue to sin — the Lord marks 
out such a person for a violent death. 

Sir 26:29 It is difficult for a merchant to avoid doing wrong and for a trader not to incur sin. 

Sir 27:1 Many have sinned for the sake of profit, one who hopes to be rich must turn a blind eye. 

Sir 27:2 A peg will stick in the joint between two stones, and sin will wedge itself between selling and buying. 

Sir 27:3 Whoëver does not firmly hold to the fear of the Lord, his house will soon be overthrown. 

Sir 27:4 In a shaken sieve the rubbish is left behind, so too the defects of a person appear in speech. 

Sir 27:5 The kiln tests the work of the potter, the test of a person is in conversation. 

Sir 27:6 The orchard where the tree grows is judged by its fruit, similarly words betray what a person feels. 

Sir 27:7 Do not praise anyone who has not yet spoken, since this is where people are tested. 

Sir 27:8 If you pursue virtue, you will attain it and put it on like a festal gown. 

Sir 27:9 Birds consort with their kind, truth comes home to those who practise it. 

Sir 27:10 The lion lies in wait for its prey, so does sin for those who do wrong. 

Sir 27:1 1 The conversation of the devout is wisdom at all times, but the fool is as changeable as the moon. 

Sir 27:12 When visiting stupid people, choose the right moment, but among the thoughtful take your time. 

Sir 27:13 The conversation of fools is disgusting, raucous their laughter in their sinful pleasures. 

Sir 27:14 The talk of hard-swearing people makes your hair stand on end, their brawling makes you stop your 
ears. 

Sir 27:15 A quarrel between the proud leads to bloodshed, and their insults are embarrassing to hear. 

Sir 27:16 A betrayer of secrets forfeits all trust and will never find the kind of friend he wants. 

Sir 27:17 Be fond of a friend and keep faith with him, but if you have betrayed his secrets, do not go after him 
any more; 

Sir 27:18 for, as one destroys a person by killing him, so you have killed your neighbour’s friendship, 

Sir 27:19 and as you let a bird slip through your fingers, so you have let your friend go, and will not catch him. 

Sir 27:20 Do not go after him - he is far away, he has fled like a gazelle from the snare. 

Sir 27:21 For a wound can be bandaged and abuse forgiven, but for the betrayer of a secret there is no hope. 

Sir 27:22 Someöne with a sly wink is plotting mischief, no one can dissuade him from it. 

Sir 27:23 Honey-tongued to your face, he is lost in admiration at your words; but behind your back he has other 
things to say, and turns your words into a stumbling-block. 

Sir 27:24 I have found many things to hate, but nothing as much as him, and the Lord hates him too. 

Sir 27:25 Whoëver throws a stone in the air, throws it on to his own head; a treacherous blow cuts both ways. 

Sir 27:26 The man who digs a pit falls into it, whoëver sets a snare will be caught by it. 

Sir 27:27 On anyone who does evil, evil will recoil, without his knowing where it comes from. 

Sir 27:28 Sarcasm and abuse are the mark of the arrogant, but vengeance lies in wait like a lion for such a one. 
Sir 27:29 The trap will close on all who rejoice in the downfall of the devout, and pain will eat them up before 
they die. 

Sir 27:30 Resentment and anger, these are foul things too, and a sinner is a master at them both. 

Sir 28:1 Whoëver exacts vengeance will experience the vengeance of the Lord, who keeps strict account of sin. 
Sir 28:2 Pardon your neighbour any wrongs done to you, and when you pray, your sins will be forgiven. 

Sir 28:3 If anyone nurses anger against another, can one then demand compassion from the Lord? 

Sir 28:4 Showing no pity for someöne like oneself, can one then plead for one’s own sins? 

Sir 28:5 Mere creature of flesh, yet cherishing resentment!-who will forgive one for sinning? 

Sir 28:6 Remember the last things, and stop hating, corruption and death, and be faithful to the commandments. 
Sir 28:7 Remember the commandments, and do not bear your fellow ill-will, remember the covenant of the Most 
High, and ignore the offence. 

Sir 28:8 Avoid quarrelling and you will sin less; for the hot-tempered provokes quarrels, 

Sir 28:9 a sinner sows trouble between friends, introducing discord among the peaceful. 

Sir 28:10 The way a fire burns depends on its fuel, a quarrel spreads in proportion to its violence; a man’s rage 
depends on his strength, his fury grows fiercer in proportion to his wealth. 

Sir 28:1 1 A sudden quarrel kindles fire, a hasty dispute leads to bloodshed. 

Sir 28:12 Blow on a spark and up it flares, spit on it and out it goes; both are the effects of your mouth. 



Sir 28:13 A curse on the scandal-monger and double-talker, such a person has ruined many who lived in 
concord. 

Sir 28:14 That third tongue has shattered the peace of many and driven them from nation to nation; it has pulled 
down fortified cities, and overthrown the houses of the great. 

Sir 28:15 The third tongue has had upright wives divorced, depriving them of reward for their hard work. 

Sir 28:16 No one who listens to it will ever know peace of mind, will ever live in peace again. 

Sir 28:17 A stroke of the whip raises a weal, but a stroke of the tongue breaks bones. 

Sir 28:18 Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but many more have fallen by the tongue. 

Sir 28:19 Blessed is anyone who has been sheltered from it, and has not experienced its fury, who has not 
dragged its yoke about, or been bound in its chains; 

Sir 28:20 for its yoke is an iron yoke, its chains are bronze chains; 

Sir 28:21 the death it inflicts is a miserable death, Sheol is preferable to it. 

Sir 28:22 It cannot gain a hold over the devout, they are not burnt by its flames. 

Sir 28:23 Those who desert the Lord will fall into it, it will flare up inextinguishably among them, it will be let 
loose against them like a lion, it will tear them like a leopard. 

Sir 28:24 Be sure you put a thorn-hedge round your property, lock away your silver and gold; 

Sir 28:25 then make scales and weights for your words, and put a door with bolts across your mouth. 

Sir 28:26 Take care you take no false step through it, in case you fall a prey to him who lies in wait. 

Sir 29:1 Making your neighbour a loan is an act of mercy, to lend him a helping hand is to keep the 
commandments. 

Sir 29:2 Lend to your neighbour in his time of need, and in your turn repay your neighbour on time. 

Sir 29:3 Be as good as your word and keep faith with him, and you will find your needs met every time. 

Sir 29:4 Many treat a loan as a windfall, and embarrass those who have come to their rescue. 

Sir 29:5 Until he gets something, a man will kiss his neighbour’s hand, and refer diffidently to his wealth; but 
when the loan falls due, he puts this off, he repays with offhand words, and pleads the inconvenience of the time. 
Sir 29:6 Even if he can be made to pay, his creditor will recover barely half, and consider even that a windfall. 
But otherwise he will be cheated of his money, and undeservedly gain himself an enemy; the man will pay him 
back in curses and abuse, and with insults instead of honour. 

Sir 29:7 Many, not out of malice, refuse to lend; they are merely anxious not to be cheated for nothing. 

Sir 29:8 Nevertheless, be patient with those who are badly off, do not keep them waiting on your generosity. 

Sir 29:9 In obedience to the commandment, help the poor; do not turn the poor away empty-handed in their 
need. 

Sir 29:10 Spend your money on your brother or your friend, do not leave it under a stone to rust away. 

Sir 29:1 1 Use your wealth as the Most High has decreed; you will find that more profitable than gold. 

Sir 29:12 Stock your store-rooms with almsgiving; this will save you from all misfortune. 

Sir 29:13 Better than sturdy shield or weighty spear, this will fight for you against the enemy. 

Sir 29:14 A good man will go surety for his neighbour; only a shameless wretch would desert him. 

Sir 29:15 Do not forget the favour your guarantor has done you; he has given his life for you. 

Sir 29:16 A sinner is careless of his guarantor’s prosperity, the ungrateful forgets his deliverer. 

Sir 29:17 Going surety has ruined many who were prosperous, tossing them about in a heavy sea. 

Sir 29:18 It has driven the powerful from home to wander among foreign nations. 

Sir 29:19 A wicked man in a hurry to stand guarantor in the hope of profit, is hurrying to be sentenced. 

Sir 29:20 Come to your neighbour’s help as far as you can, but take care not to fall into the same plight. 

Sir 29:21 The first thing in life is water, and bread, and clothing, and a house for the sake of privacy. 

Sir 29:22 Better the life of the poor under a roof of planks, than lavish fare in somebody else’s house. 

Sir 29:23 Whether you have little or much, be content with it, and you will not hear your household complaining. 
Sir 29:24 It is a miserable life, going from house to house; wherever you stay, you dare not open your mouth, 

Sir 29:25 you do not belong, you receive no thanks for the drink you pour out and hear embittering words into 
the bargain: 

Sir 29:26 “Come along, stranger, lay the table, what have you got ready? give me something to eat!”. 

Sir 29:27 “Go away, stranger, make room for someöne important; my brother is coming to stay, I need the 
house”. 

Sir 29:28 It is hard for the reasonable to be begrudged hospitality to be shamed like a debtor. 

Sir 30:1 Whoëver loves his son will beat him frequently so that in after years the son may be his comfort. 

Sir 30:2 Whoëver is strict with his son will reap the benefit, and be able to boast of him to his acquaintances. 

Sir 30:3 Whoëver educates his son will be the envy of his enemy, and will be proud of him among his friends. 

Sir 30:4 Even when the father dies, he might well not be dead, since he leaves his likeness behind him. 

Sir 30:5 In life he has had the joy of his company, dying, he has no anxieties. 

Sir 30:6 He leaves an avenger against his enemies and a rewarder of favours for his friends. 



Sir 30:7 Whoëver coddles his son will bandage his wounds, his heart will turn over at every cry. 

Sir 30:8 A badly broken-in horse turns out stubborn, a son left to himself turns out headstrong. 

Sir 30:9 Pamper your child and he will terrorise you, play along with him and he will bring you sorrow. 

Sir 30:10 Do not laugh with him, or one day you will weep with him and end up gnashing your teeth. 

Sir 30:1 1 While he is young, do not allow him his freedom and do not wink at his mistakes. 

Sir 30:12 Bend his neck in youth, bruise his ribs while he is a child, or else he will grow stubborn and 
disobedient, and hurt you very deeply. 

Sir 30:13 Be strict with your son, and persevere with him, or you will rue his insolence. 

Sir 30:14 Better be poor if healthy and fit than rich if tormented in body. 

Sir 30:15 Health and strength are better than any gold, a robust body than untold wealth. 

Sir 30:16 No riches can outweigh bodily health, no enjoyment surpass a cheerful heart. 

Sir 30:17 Better death than a wretched life, and everlasting rest than chronic illness. 

Sir 30:18 Good things lavished on a closed mouth are like food offerings put on a grave. 

Sir 30:19 What use is an offering to an idol which can neither eat nor smell? How describe someöne pursued by 
the Lord’s displeasure? 

Sir 30:20 He looks and sighs like a eunuch embracing a pretty girl — how he sighs! 

Sir 30:21 Do not abandon yourself to sorrow, do not torment yourself with brooding. 

Sir 30:22 Gladness of heart is life to anyone, joy is what gives length of days. 

Sir 30:23 Give your cares the slip, console your heart, chase sorrow far away; for sorrow has been the ruin of 
many, and is no use to anybody. 

Sir 30:24 Jealousy and anger shorten your days, and worry brings premature old age. 

Sir 30:25 A genial heart makes a good trencherman, someöne who enjoys a good meal. 

Sir 31:1 The sleeplessness brought by wealth makes a person lose weight, the worry it causes drives away 
sleep. 

Sir 31 :2 The worries of the daytime prevent you from sleeping, like a serious illness, they keep sleep at bay. 

Sir 31 :3 The rich for ever toils, piling up money, and then, leaving off, he is gorged with luxuries; 

Sir 31 :4 the poor for ever toils, barely making a living, and then, leaving off, is poorer than ever. 

Sir 31 :5 No one who loves money can easily avoid sinning, whoëver pursues profit will be corrupted by it. 

Sir 31 :6 Gold has been the ruin of many; their coming destruction was self-evident, 

Sir 31 :7 since it is a snare for those who sacrifice to it and stupid people all get caught in it. 

Sir 31 :8 Happy the rich who is found to be blameless and does not go chasing after gold. 

Sir 31 :9 Who is he, so that we can congratulate him, for he has achieved marvels among his fellows? 

Sir 31:10 Who has been through this test and emerged perfect? He may well be proud of that! Who has had the 
chance to sin and has not sinned, had the chance to do wrong and has not done it? 

Sir 31:11 His fortune will be firmly based and the assembly will acclaim his generosity. 

Sir 31:12 If you are sitting down to a lavish table, do not display your greed, do not say, “What a lot to eat!”. 

Sir 31:13 Remember, it is bad to have a greedy eye. Is any creature more wicked than the eye? - That is why it 
is always weeping! 

Sir 31:14 Do not reach out for anything your host has his eye on, do not jostle him at the dish. 

Sir 31:15 Judge your fellow-guest’s needs by your own, be thoughtful in everyway. 

Sir 31:16 Eat what is offered you like a well brought-up person, do not wolf your food or you will earn dislike. 

Sir 31:17 For politeness’ sake be the first to stop; do not act the glutton, or you will give offence, 

Sir 31:18 and if you are sitting with a large party, do not help yourself before the others do. 

Sir 31:19 A little is quite enough for a well-bred person; his breathing is easy when he lies in bed. 

Sir 31 :20 A moderate diet ensures sound sleep, one gets up early, in the best of spirits. Sleeplessness, 
biliousness and gripe are what the glutton has to endure. 

Sir 31 :21 If you are forced to eat too much, get up, go and vomit, and you will feel better. 

Sir 31 :22 Listen to me, my child, do not disregard me, eventually you will see the force of my words. Be 
moderate in all your activities and illness will never overtake you. 

Sir 31 :23 People praise the person who keeps a splendid table, and their opinion of his munificence is sound. 

Sir 31 :24 But a niggardly host provokes universal resentment and people will retail instances of his meanness. 

Sir 31 :25 Do not play the valiant at your wine, for wine has been the undoing of many. 

Sir 31 :26 The furnace proves the temper of steel, and wine proves hearts in the drinking bouts of braggarts. 

Sir 31 :27 Wine gives life if drunk in moderation. What is life worth without wine? It came into being to make 
people happy. 

Sir 31 :28 Drunk at the right time and in the right amount, wine makes for a glad heart and a cheerful mind. 

Sir 31 :29 Bitterness of soul comes of wine drunk to excess out of temper or bravado. 

Sir 31 :30 Drunkenness excites the stupid to a fury to his own harm, it reduces his strength while leading to 
blows. 



Sir 31 :31 Do not provoke your fellow-guest at a wine feast, do not make fun of him when he is enjoying himself, 
do not take him to task or annoy him by reclaiming money owed. 

Sir 32:1 Have they made you the presider? Do not let it go to your head, behave like everyone else in the party, 
see that they are happy and then sit down yourself. 

Sir 32:2 Having discharged your duties, take your place so that your joy may be through theirs, and you may 
receive the crown for your competence. 

Sir 32:3 Speak, old man — it is proper that you should - but with discretion: do not spoil the music. 

Sir 32:4 If someöne is singing, do not ramble on and do not play the sage at the wrong moment. 

Sir 32:5 An amber seal on a precious stone, such is a concert of music at a wine feast. 

Sir 32:6 An emerald seal in a golden setting, such are strains of music with a vintage wine. 

Sir 32:7 Speak, young man, when you must, but twice at most, and then only if questioned. 

Sir 32:8 Keep to the point, say much in few words; give the impression of knowing but not wanting to speak. 

Sir 32:9 Among eminent people do not behave as though you were their equal; do not make frivolous remarks 
when someöne else is speaking. 

Sir 32:10 Lightning comes before the thunder, favour goes ahead of a modest person. 

Sir 32:1 1 Leave in good time, do not bring up the rear, and hurry home without loitering. 

Sir 32:12 There amuse yourself, and do what you have a mind to, but do not sin by arrogant talk. 

Sir 32:13 And for all this bless your Creator, who intoxicates you with his favours. 

Sir 32:14 Whoëver fears the Lord will accept his correction; those who look for him will win his favour. 

Sir 32:15 Whoëver seeks the Law will be nourished by it, the hypocrite will find it a stumbling-block. 

Sir 32:16 Those who fear the Lord win his approval, their good deeds shining like a light. 

Sir 32:17 The sinner waves reproof aside, he finds an excuse for headstrong behaviour. 

Sir 32:18 A sensible person never scorns a warning; foreigners and the proud do not know about fear. 

Sir 32:19 Never act without reflection, and you will not regret your actions. 

Sir 32:20 Do not venture on a rough road, for fear of stumbling over the stones. 

Sir 32:21 Do not be over-confident on an even road 
Sir 32:22 and beware of your own children. 

Sir 32:23 Watch yourself in everything you do; this is also the way to keep the commandments. 

Sir 32:24 Anyone who trusts in the Law obeys its precepts, no one who has confidence in the Lord will come to 
harm. 

Sir 33:1 No evil will befall one who fears the Lord, such a one will be rescued even in the ordeal. 

Sir 33:2 No one who hates the Law is wise, one who is hypocritical about it is like a storm-tossed ship. 

Sir 33:3 An intelligent person will put faith in the Law, for such a one the Law is as dependable as a prophecy. 
Sir 33:4 Prepare what you have to say and you will get a hearing, marshal your information before you answer. 
Sir 33:5 The feelings of a fool are like a cart-wheel, a fool’s thought revolves like a turning axle. 

Sir 33:6 A rutting stallion is like a sarcastic friend; he neighs, whoëver rides him. 

Sir 33:7 Why is one day better than another, though the sun gives the same daylight throughout the year? 

Sir 33:8 They have been differentiated in the mind of the Lord, who has diversified the seasons and feasts; 

Sir 33:9 some he has made more important and has hallowed, others he has made ordinary days. 

Sir 33:10 Human beings come from the ground, Adam himself was formed out of earth; 

Sir 33:1 1 in the fullness of his wisdom the Lord has made distinctions between them, and diversified their 
conditions. 

Sir 33:12 Some of them he has blessed, hallowing and setting them near him; others he has cursed and 
humiliated by degrading them from their positions. 

Sir 33:13 Like clay in the hands of the potter to mould as it pleases him, so are human beings in the hands of 
their Maker to reward as he judges right. 

Sir 33:14 Opposite evil stands good, opposite death, life; so too opposite the devout stands the sinner. 

Sir 33:15 Contemplate all the works of the Most High, you will find they go in pairs, by opposites. 

Sir 33:16 Although the last to come, I have kept my eyes open like a man picking up what the grape-pickers 
have left. 

Sir 33:17 By the blessing of the Lord I have come in first, and like a true grape-picker have filled my winepress. 
Sir 33:18 And note, I have not been working merely for myself, but for all who seek instruction. 

Sir 33:19 Listen to me, important public figures, presidents of the assembly, give ear! 

Sir 33:20 Neither to son nor wife, brother nor friend, give power over yourself during your own lifetime. And do 
not give your property to anyone else, in case you regret it and have to ask for it back. 

Sir 33:21 As long as you live and there is breath in your body, do not yield power over yourself to anyone; 

Sir 33:22 better for your children to come begging to you, than for you to have to go begging to them. 

Sir 33:23 In all you do be the master, and leave a reputation unstained. 

Sir 33:24 The day your life draws to a close, at the hour of death, then distribute your heritage. 



Sir 33:25 Fodder, the stick and burdens for a donkey, bread, discipline and work for a slave. 

Sir 33:26 Work your slave hard, and you will have peace of mind, leave his hands idle, and he will be asking for 
his freedom. 

Sir 33:27 Yoke and harness will bow the neck, for a bad servant, torments and the rack. 

Sir 33:28 Set him to work, so that he will not be idle; idleness teaches every kind of mischief. 

Sir 33:29 Keep him at his duties, where he should be, if he is disobedient, clap him in irons. 

Sir 33:30 But do not be over-exacting with anyone, and do nothing contrary to justice. 

Sir 33:31 You have only one slave? Treat him like yourself, since you have acquired him with blood. 

Sir 33:32 You have only one slave? Treat him as a brother, since you need him as you need yourself. 

Sir 33:33 If you ill-treat him and he runs away, which way will you go to look for him? 

Sir 34:1 Vain and deceptive hopes are for the foolish, and dreams lend wings to fools. 

Sir 34:2 As well clutch at shadows and chase the wind as put any faith in dreams. 

Sir 34:3 Dreams are no different from mirrors; confronting a face, the reflection of that face. 

Sir 34:4 What can be cleansed by uncleanness, what can be verified by falsehood? 

Sir 34:5 Divinations, auguries and dreams are nonsense, like the fantasies of a pregnant woman. 

Sir 34:6 Unless sent as emissaries from the Most High, do not give them a thought; 

Sir 34:7 for dreams have led many astray, and those who relied on them have come to grief. 

Sir 34:8 Fulfilling the Law requires no such falsehood, and wisdom is perfected in veracity. 

Sir 34:9 A much travelled man knows many things, and a man of great experience will talk sound sense. 

Sir 34:10 Someöne who has never had his trials knows little; but the travelled man is master of every situation. 
Sir 34:1 1 I have seen many things on my travels, I have understood more than I can put into words. 

Sir 34:12 I have often been in danger of death, but I have been spared, and this is why: 

Sir 34:13 the spirit of those who fear the Lord can survive, for their hope is in someöne with power to save them. 
Sir 34:14 No one who fears the Lord need ever hesitate, or ever be daunted, since the Lord is his hope. 

Sir 34:15 Happy the soul of one who fears the Lord. On whom does he rely? Who supports him? 

Sir 34:16 The eyes of the Lord watch over those who love him, he is their powerful protection and their strong 
support, their screen from the desert wind, their shelter from the midday sun, a guard against stumbling, an 
assurance against a fall. 

Sir 34:17 He revives the spirit and brightens the eyes, he gives health, life and blessing. 

Sir 34:18 The sacrifice of an offering unjustly acquired is a mockery; the gifts of the impious are unacceptable. 
Sir 34:19 The Most High takes no pleasure in offerings from the godless, multiplying sacrifices will not gain 
pardon for sin. 

Sir 34:20 Offering sacrifice from the property of the poor is as bad as slaughtering a son before his father’s 
eyes. 

Sir 34:21 A meagre diet is the very life of the poor, to deprive them of it is to commit murder. 

Sir 34:22 To take away a fellow-man’s livelihood is to kill him, to deprive an employee of his wages is to shed 

blood. 

Sir 34:23 If one person builds while another pulls down, what will they get out of it but trouble? 

Sir 34:24 If one person prays and another calls down a curse, to which one’s voice is the Master going to listen? 

Sir 34:25 If someöne washes after touching a corpse, and then touches it again, what is the good of his 
washing? 

Sir 34:26 Just so with someöne who fasts for sin, and then goes and commits it again. Who is going to hear that 
person’s prayer? What is the good of the self-abasement? 

Sir 35:1 One who keeps the Law multiplies offerings; one who follows the commandments offers communion 
sacrifices. 

Sir 35:2 Proof of gratitude is an offering of fine flour, almsgiving a sacrifice of praise. 

Sir 35:3 To abandon wickedness is what pleases the Lord, to give up wrong-doing is an expiatory sacrifice. 

Sir 35:4 Do not appear empty-handed in the Lord’s presence; for all these things are due under the 
commandment. 

Sir 35:5 The offering of the upright graces the altar, and its savour rises before the Most High. 

Sir 35:6 The sacrifice of the upright is acceptable, its memorial will not be forgotten. 

Sir 35:7 Honour the Lord with generosity, do not stint the first-fruits you bring. 

Sir 35:8 Add a smiling face to all your gifts, and be cheerful as you dedicate your tithes. 

Sir 35:9 Give to the Most High as he has given to you, as generously as your means can afford; 

Sir 35:10 for the Lord is a good rewarder, he will reward you seven times over. 

Sir 35:1 1 Do not try to bribe him with presents, he will not accept them, do not put your faith in wrongly 
motivated sacrifices; 

Sir 35:12 for the Lord is a judge who is utterly impartial. 

Sir 35:13 He never shows partiality to the detriment of the poor, he listens to the plea of the injured party. 



Sir 35:14 He does not ignore the orphan’s supplication, nor the widow’s as she pours out her complaint. 

Sir 35:15 Do the widow’s tears not run down her cheeks, as she accuses the man who is the cause of them? 

Sir 35:16 Whoëver wholeheartedly serves God will be accepted, his petitions will carry to the clouds. 

Sir 35:17 The prayer of the humble pierces the clouds: and until it does, he is not to be consoled, 

Sir 35:18 nor will he desist until the Most High takes notice of him, acquits the upright and delivers judgement. 
Sir 35:19 And the Lord will not be slow, nor will he be dilatory on their behalf, 

Sir 35:20 until he has crushed the loins of the merciless and exacted vengeance on the nations, 

Sir 35:21 until he has eliminated the hordes of the arrogant and broken the sceptres of the wicked, 

Sir 35:22 until he has repaid all people as their deeds deserve and human actions as their intentions merit, 

Sir 35:23 until he has judged the case of his people and made them rejoice in his mercy. 

Sir 35:24 Mercy is welcome in time of trouble, like rain clouds in time of drought. 

Sir 36:1 Take pity on us, Master, Lord of the universe, look at us, spread fear of yourself throughout all other 
nations. 

Sir 36:2 Raise your hand against the foreign nations and let them see your might. 

Sir 36:3 As, in their sight, you have proved yourself holy to us, so now, in our sight, prove yourself great to them. 
Sir 36:4 Let them acknowledge you, just as we have acknowledged that there is no God but you, Lord. 

Sir 36:5 Send new portents, do fresh wonders, win glory for your hand and your right arm. 

Sir 36:6 Rouse your fury, pour out your rage, destroy the opponent, annihilate the enemy. 

Sir 36:7 Hasten the day, remember the oath, and let people tell of your mighty deeds. 

Sir 36:8 Let fiery wrath swallow up the survivor, and destruction overtake those who oppress your people. 

Sir 36:9 Crush the heads of hostile rulers who say, “There is no one else but us!”. 

Sir 36:10 Gather together all the tribes of Jacob, restore them their heritage as at the beginning. 

Sir 36:1 1 Take pity, Lord, on the people called by your name, on Israel whom you have made your first-born. 

Sir 36:12 Have compassion on your holy city, on Jerusalem, the place where you rest. 

Sir 36:13 Fill Zion with your praises and your sanctuary with your glory. 

Sir 36:14 Vindicate those whom you created first, fulfil what has been prophesied in your name. 

Sir 36:15 Give those who wait for you their reward, let your prophets be proved true. 

Sir 36:16 Grant, Lord, the prayer of your servants, in the terms of Aaron’s blessing on your people, 

Sir 36:17 so that all the earth’s inhabitants may acknowledge that you are the Lord, the everlasting God. 

Sir 36:18 The stomach takes in all kinds of food, but some foods are better than others. 

Sir 36:19 As the palate discerns the flavour of game, so a shrewd listener detects lying words. 

Sir 36:20 A perverse character causes depression in others; it needs experience to know how to repay such a 
one. 

Sir 36:21 A woman will accept any husband, but some daughters are better than others. 

Sir 36:22 A woman’s beauty delights the beholder, a man likes nothing better. 

Sir 36:23 If her tongue is kind and gentle, her husband is the happiest of men. 

Sir 36:24 The man who takes a wife has the makings of a fortune, a helper to match himself, a pillar of support. 
Sir 36:25 When property has no fence, it is open to plunder, when a man has no wife, he is aimless and 
querulous. 

Sir 36:26 Will anyone trust an armed thief who flits from town to town? 

Sir 36:27 So it is with the man who has no nest, and lodges wherever night overtakes him. 

Sir 37:1 Any friend will say, “I am your friend too”, but some friends are friends only in name. 

Sir 37:2 Is it not a deadly sorrow when a comrade or a friend turns enemy? 

Sir 37:3 O evil inclination, why were you created, to cover the earth with deceit? 

Sir 37:4 One kind of comrade congratulates a friend in prosperity but in time of trouble appears on the other 
side. 

Sir 37:5 One kind of comrade genuinely feels for a friend and when it comes to a fight, springs to arms. 

Sir 37:6 Do not forget the genuine friend, do not push him out of mind once you are rich. 

Sir 37:7 Any adviser will offer advice, but some are governed by self-interest. 

Sir 37:8 Beware of someöne who offers advice; first find out what he wants himself- since his advice coincides 
with his own interest — in case he has designs on you 

Sir 37:9 and tells you, “You are on the right road”, but stands well clear to see what will happen to you. 

Sir 37:10 Do not consult anyone who looks at you askance, conceal your plans from people jealous of you. 

Sir 37:1 1 Do not consult a woman about her rival, or a coward about war, a merchant about prices, or a buyer 
about selling, anyone mean about gratitude, or anyone selfish about kindness, a lazy fellow about any sort of 
work, or a casual worker about finishing a job, an idle servant about a major undertaking — do not rely on these 
for any advice. 

Sir 37:12 But have constant recourse to some devout person, whom you know to be a keeper of the 
commandments, whose soul matches your own, and who, if you go wrong, will be sympathetic. 



Sir 37:13 Finally, stick to the advice your own heart gives you, no one can be truer to you than that; 

Sir 37:14 since a person’s soul often gives a clearer warning than seven watchmen perched on a watchtower. 

Sir 37:15 And besides all this beg the Most High to guide your steps into the truth. 

Sir 37:16 Reason should be the basis for every activity, reflection must come before any undertaking. 

Sir 37:17 Thoughts are rooted in the heart, and this sends out four branches: 

Sir 37:18 good and evil, life and death, and mistress of them always is the tongue. 

Sir 37:19 One kind of person is clever at teaching others, yet is no good whatever to himself; 

Sir 37:20 another, very eloquent, is detested and ends by starving to death, 

Sir 37:21 not having won the favour of the Lord, and being destitute of all wisdom. 

Sir 37:22 Another considers himself wise and proclaims his intellectual conclusions as certainties. 

Sir 37:23 But the truly wise instructs his people and his intellectual conclusions are certainties. 

Sir 37:24 The wise is showered with blessings, and all who see him will call him happy. 

Sir 37:25 Human life lasts a number of days, but the days of Israel are beyond counting. 

Sir 37:26 The wise will earn confidence among the people, his name will live for ever. 

Sir 37:27 During your life, my child, see what suits your constitution, do not give it what you find disagrees with 
it; 

Sir 37:28 for not everything is good for everybody, nor does everybody like everything. 

Sir 37:29 Do not be insatiable for any delicacy, do not be greedy for food, 

Sir 37:30 for over-eating leads to illness and excess leads to liver-attacks. 

Sir 37:31 Many people have died from over-eating; control yourself, and so prolong your life. 

Sir 38:1 Treat the doctor with the honour that is his due, in consideration of his services; for he too has been 

created by the Lord. 

Sir 38:2 Healing itself comes from the Most High, like a gift received from a king. 

Sir 38:3 The doctor’s learning keeps his head high, and the great regard him with awe. 

Sir 38:4 The Lord has brought forth medicinal herbs from the ground, and no one sensible will despise them. 

Sir 38:5 Did not a piece of wood once sweeten the water, thus giving proof of its power? 

Sir 38:6 He has also given some people knowledge, so that they may draw credit from his mighty works. 

Sir 38:7 He uses these for healing and relieving pain; the druggist makes up a mixture from them. 

Sir 38:8 Thus, there is no end to his activities; thanks to him, well-being exists throughout the world. 

Sir 38:9 My child, when you are ill, do not rebel, but pray to the Lord and he will heal you. 

Sir 38:10 Renounce your faults, keep your hands unsoiled, and cleanse your heart from all sin. 

Sir 38:1 1 Offer incense and a memorial of fine flour, make as rich an offering as you can afford. 

Sir 38:12 Then let the doctor take over — the Lord created him too — do not let him leave you, for you need him. 

Sir 38:13 There are times when good health depends on doctors. 

Sir 38:14 For they, in their turn, will pray the Lord to grant them the grace to relieve and to heal, and so prolong 
your life. 

Sir 38:15 Whoëver sins in the eyes of his Maker, let such a one come under the care of the doctor! 

Sir 38:16 My child, shed tears over the dead, lament for the dead to show your sorrow, then bury the body with 
due ceremony and do not fail to honour the grave. 

Sir 38:17 Weep bitterly, beat your breast, observe the mourning the dead deserves for a day or two, to avoid 
censorious comment, and then be comforted in your sorrow; 

Sir 38:18 for grief can lead to death, a grief-stricken heart loses all energy. 

Sir 38:19 In affliction sorrow persists, a life of grief is hard to bear. 

Sir 38:20 Do not abandon your heart to grief, drive it away, bear your own end in mind. 

Sir 38:21 Do not forget, there is no coming back; you cannot help the dead, and you will harm yourself. 

Sir 38:22 “Remember my doom, since it will be yours too; I yesterday, you today!”. 

Sir 38:23 Once the dead are laid to rest, let their memory rest, do not fret for them, once their spirit departs. 

Sir 38:24 Leisure gives the scribe the chance to acquire wisdom; a man with few commitments can grow wise. 
Sir 38:25 How can the ploughman become wise, whose sole ambition is to wield the goad, driving his oxen, 
engrossed in their work, his conversation limited to bullocks, 

Sir 38:26 his thoughts absorbed in the furrows he traces and his long evenings spent in fattening heifers? 

Sir 38:27 Similarly with all workmen and craftsmen, toiling day and night; those who engrave seals, for ever 
trying to think of a new design, concentrating on catching a good likeness and staying up late to get the work 
done. 

Sir 38:28 Similarly with the blacksmith sitting by his anvil; he considers what to do with the pig-iron, the breath of 
the fire scorches his skin, as he contends with the heat of the furnace; the noise of the hammer deafens him, his 
eyes are fixed on the pattern; he concentrates on getting the job done well and stays up late to apply the 
finishing touches. 

Sir 38:29 Similarly with the potter, sitting at his work, turning the wheel with his feet; constantly on the alert over 



his work, each flick of the finger premeditated; 

Sir 38:30 he pummels the clay with his arm, and with his feet he kneads it; he concentrates on applying the 
glaze right and stays up late to clean the kiln. 

Sir 38:31 All these people rely on their hands and each is skilled at his own craft. 

Sir 38:32 A town could not be inhabited without them, there would be no settling, no travelling. 

Sir 38:33 But you will not find them in the parliament, they do not hold high rank in the assembly. They do not sit 
on the judicial bench, and they do not meditate on the Law. 

Sir 38:34 They are not remarkable for their culture or judgement, nor are they found frequenting the 
philosophers. They sustain the structure of the world, and their prayer is concerned with their trade. 

Sir 39:1 Not so with one who concentrates his mind and his meditation on the Law of the Most High. He 
researches into the wisdom of all the Ancients, he occupies his time with the prophecies. 

Sir 39:2 He preserves the discourses of famous men, he is at home with the niceties of parables. 

Sir 39:3 He researches into the hidden sense of proverbs, he ponders the obscurities of parables. 

Sir 39:4 He enters the service of princes, he is seen in the presence of rulers. He travels in foreign countries, he 
has experienced human good and human evil. 

Sir 39:5 At dawn and with all his heart he turns to the Lord his Creator; he pleads in the presence of the Most 
High, he opens his mouth in prayer and makes entreaty for his sins. 

Sir 39:6 If such be the will of the great Lord, he will be filled with the spirit of intelligence, he will shower forth 
words of wisdom, and in prayer give thanks to the Lord. 

Sir 39:7 He will grow upright in purpose and learning, he will ponder the Lord’s hidden mysteries. 

Sir 39:8 He will display the instruction he has received, taking his pride in the Law of the Lord’s covenant. 

Sir 39:9 Many will praise his intelligence and it will never be forgotten. His memory will not disappear, 
generation after generation his name will live. 

Sir 39:10 Nations will proclaim his wisdom, the assembly will celebrate his praises. 

Sir 39:1 1 If he lives long, his name will be more glorious than a thousand others, and if he dies, that will satisfy 
him just as well. 

Sir 39:12 And here are some more of my reflections: yes, I am as full as the moon at the full! 

Sir 39:13 Listen to me, devout children, and blossom like the rose that grows on the bank of a watercourse. 

Sir 39:14 Give off a sweet smell like incense, flower like the lily, spread your fragrance abroad, sing a song of 
praise blessing the Lord for all his works. 

Sir 39:15 Declare the greatness of his name, proclaim his praise with song and with lyre, and this is how you 
must sing his praises: 

Sir 39:16 “How wonderful, the actions of the Lord! Whatever he orders is done at the proper time!”. You must not 
say, “What is this? Why is that?”. There is a proper time for every question. 

Sir 39:17 At his word, the water stops and piles up high, at his voice, the watery reservoirs take shape, 

Sir 39:18 at his command, whatever he wants is done, no one can stop him, if he intends to save. 

Sir 39:19 He can see whatever human beings are doing, nothing can be hidden from his eye; 

Sir 39:20 his gaze stretches from eternity to eternity, and nothing can astonish him. 

Sir 39:21 You must not say, “What is this? Why is that?”. for everything has been made for a purpose. 

Sir 39:22 As his blessing covers the dry land like a river and soaks it like a flood, 

Sir 39:23 so retribution is his legacy to the nations, just as he has turned fresh waters to salt. 

Sir 39:24 His ways are as smooth for the devout, as they are full of obstacles for the wicked. 

Sir 39:25 Good things were created from the beginning for good people, as bad ones were for sinners. 

Sir 39:26 The prime needs of human beings for living are water and fire, iron and salt, wheat-flour, milk and 
honey, the juice of the grape, oil and clothing. 

Sir 39:27 All these are good for those who are good, but turn out bad for sinners. 

Sir 39:28 Some winds have been created for punishing, in his fury, he uses them as scourges; on the day of 
doom, they unleash their violence and appease the wrath of their Creator. 

Sir 39:29 Fire and hail, famine and death, have all been created for punishing. 

Sir 39:30 Wild animals’ fangs, scorpions, vipers, the avenging sword for the ruin of the godless: 

Sir 39:31 all of them exult in discharging his orders, ready on earth whenever the need arises and, when their 
time comes, not falling short of his word. 

Sir 39:32 That is why I was determined from the outset, why I have pondered and why I have written, 

Sir 39:33 “The works of the Lord are all good, when the time is right, he gives whatever is needed. 

Sir 39:34 You must not say, ‘This is worse than that’, for, sooner or later, everything proves its worth. 

Sir 39:35 So now, sing with all your heart and voice, and bless the name of the Lord!”. 

Sir 40:1 A hard lot has been created for human beings, a heavy yoke lies on the children of Adam from the day 
they come out of their mother’s womb, till the day they return to the mother of them all. 

Sir 40:2 What fills them with foreboding and their hearts with fear is dread of the day of death. 



Sir 40:3 From the one who sits on a glorious throne to the wretch in dust and ashes, 

Sir 40:4 from the one who wears purple and a crown to the one dressed in sacking, all is fury and jealousy, 
turmoil and unrest, fear of death, rivalry, strife. 

Sir 40:5 And even at night while he rests on his bed his sleep only gives a new twist to his worries: 

Sir 40:6 scarcely has he lain down to rest, when in his sleep, as if in broad daylight, he is troubled with 
nightmares, like one who has escaped from a battle, 

Sir 40:7 and at the moment of rescue he wakes up, amazed that there was nothing to be afraid of! 

Sir 40:8 For all creatures, human and animal — and seven times more for sinners- 
Sir40:9 there is death and blood and strife and the sword, disasters, famine, affliction, plague. 

Sir 40:10 These things were all created for the wicked, and the Flood came because of them. 

Sir 40:1 1 All that comes from the earth returns to the earth, and what comes from the water returns to the sea. 
Sir 40:12 All bribery and injustice will be blotted out, but good faith will stand for ever. 

Sir 40:13 Ill-gotten wealth will vanish like a torrent, like the single thunder-clap that heralds rain. 

Sir 40:14 When he opens his hand, he rejoices, by the same token, sinners come to ruin. 

Sir 40:15 The sprigs of the godless will not make many branches, tainted roots find only hard rock. 

Sir 40:16 The reed that grows by every lake and river’s edge is the first plant to be uprooted. 

Sir 40:17 Charity is a very paradise of blessing and almsgiving endures for ever. 

Sir 40:18 For a person of private means and one who works hard, life is pleasant, better off than either, one who 
finds a treasure. 

Sir 40:19 Children and the founding of a city perpetuate a name: more esteemed than either, a perfect wife. 

Sir 40:20 Wine and music cheer the heart; better than either, the love of wisdom. 

Sir 40:21 Flute and harp add sweetness to a song; better than either, a melodious voice. 

Sir 40:22 The eye longs for grace and beauty; better than either, the green of spring corn. 

Sir 40:23 Friend or comrade — it is always well met; better than either, a wife and husband. 

Sir 40:24 Brothers and allies are good in times of trouble; better than either, almsgiving to the rescue. 

Sir 40:25 Gold and silver will steady your feet; more esteemed than either, good advice. 

Sir 40:26 Money and strength make a confident heart; better than either, the fear of the Lord. With fear of the 
Lord, nothing is lacking: no need to seek for other help. 

Sir 40:27 Fear of the Lord is a paradise of blessing, a better protection than the highest reputation. 

Sir 40:28 My child, do not live by sponging off others, better be dead than be a sponger. 

Sir 40:29 A life spent in eyeing someöne else’s table cannot be accounted a life at all. Other people’s food 
defiles the gullet; a wise, well-brought-up person will beware of doing this. 

Sir 40:30 What a sponger says may sound very sweet but in his belly there burns a fire. 

Sir 41:1 O death, how bitter it is to remember you for someöne peacefully living with his possessions, for 
someöne with no worries and everything going well and who can still enjoy his food! 

Sir 41 :2 O death, your sentence is welcome to one in want, whose strength is failing, to one worn out with age 
and a thousand worries, resentful and impatient! 

Sir 41 :3 Do not dread death’s sentence; remember those who came before you and those who will come after. 
Sir 41 :4 This is the sentence passed on all living creatures by the Lord, so why object to what seems good to 
the Most High? Whether your life lasts ten or a hundred or a thousand years, its length will not be held against 
you in Sheol. 

Sir 41 :5 Hateful brats, such are the children of sinners, who foregather in the haunts of the godless. 

Sir 41 :6 The inheritance of sinners’ children is doomed to perish, their posterity will endure lasting reproach. 

Sir 41 :7 A godless father will be blamed by his children for the reproach he has brought on them. 

Sir 41 :8 A bad outlook for you, godless people, who have forsaken the Law of God Most High. 

Sir 41 :9 When you were born, you were born to be accursed, and when you die, that curse will be your portion. 
Sir 41:10 All that comes from the earth returns to the earth, so too the wicked proceed from curse to destruction. 
Sir 41:11 Mourning concerns only the bodies of the dead, but the worthless name of sinners will be blotted out. 
Sir 41:12 Be careful of your reputation, for it will last you longer than a thousand great hoards of gold. 

Sir 41:13 A good life lasts a certain number of days, but a good reputation lasts for ever. 

Sir 41:14 Keep my instructions and be at peace, my children. Wisdom hidden away and treasure undisplayed, 
what use is either of these? 

Sir 41:1 5 Better someöne who hides his folly than one who hides his wisdom. 

Sir 41:16 Preserve a sense of shame in the following matters, for not every kind of shame is right to harbour, 
nor is every situation correctly appraised by all. 

Sir 41:1 7 Be ashamed, before father and mother, of depraved behaviour, and before prince or potentate of 
telling lies; 

Sir 41:1 8 of wrong-doing before judge or magistrate, and of impiety before the assembly of the people; 

Sir 41:1 9 of sharp practice before your companion and your friend, and of theft before the neighbourhood you 



live in. 

Sir 41 :20 Before the truth and covenant of God, be ashamed of leaning elbows on the table, 

Sir 41 :21 of being ungracious when giving or receiving, of ignoring those who greet you, 

Sir 41 :22 of gazing at a loose woman, of repulsing your fellow-countryman, 

Sir 41 :23 of misappropriating another’s portion or gift, of paying court to another man’s wife, 

Sir 41 :24 of making advances to his servant-girl — do not go near her bed- 

Sir 41 :25 of saying disagreeable things to friends — do not follow up a gift with a taunt- 

Sir 41 :26 of repeating everything you hear and of betraying confidences. 

Sir 41 :27 Then you will know what true shame is, and you will find yourself in everyone’s graces. 

Sir 42:1 The following things you should not be ashamed of, and do not sin from fear of what others think: 

Sir 42:2 of the Law of the Most High or of the covenant, of a verdict that acquits the godless, 

Sir 42:3 of keeping accounts with a travelling companion, of settling property on your friends, 

Sir 42:4 of being accurate over scales and weights, of making small and large profits, 

Sir 42:5 of gaining from commercial transactions, of disciplining your children strictly, of lashing a wicked slave 
till you draw blood. 

Sir 42:6 With an interfering wife, it is as well to use your seal, and where there are many hands, lock things up. 
Sir 42:7 Whatever stores you issue, do it by number and weight, spendings and takings, put everything in 
writing. 

Sir 42:8 Do not be ashamed to correct a stupid person or a fool, or an old dotard who bickers with young 
people. Then you will show yourself really educated and win the approval of everyone. 

Sir 42:9 Unknown to her, a daughter keeps her father awake, the worry she gives him drives away his sleep: in 
her youth, in case she never marries, married, in case she should be disliked, 

Sir 42:10 as a virgin, in case she should be defiled and found with child in her father’s house, having a husband, 
in case she goes astray, married, in case she should be sterile! 

Sir 42:1 1 Your daughter is headstrong? Keep a sharp look-out that she does not make you the laughing-stock of 
your enemies, the talk of the town, the object of common gossip, and put you to public shame. 

Sir 42:12 Do not stare at any man for his good looks, do not sit down with women; 

Sir 42:13 for moth comes out of clothes, and woman’s spite out of woman. 

Sir 42:14 Better a man’s spite than a woman’s kindness: women give rise to shame and reproach. 

Sir 42:15 Next, I shall remind you of the works of the Lord, and tell of what I have seen. By the words of the Lord 
his works come into being and all creation obeys his will. 

Sir 42:16 The shining sun looks down on all things, and the work of the Lord is full of his glory. 

Sir 42:17 The Lord has not granted the Holy Ones the power to tell of all his marvels which the Almighty Lord 
has solidly constructed for the universe to stand firm in his glory. 

Sir 42:18 He has fathomed both the abyss and the human heart and seen into their devious ways; for the Most 
High knows all there is to know and sees the signs of the times. 

Sir 42:19 He declares what is past and what will be, and reveals the trend of hidden things. 

Sir 42:20 Not a thought escapes him, not a single word is hidden from him. 

Sir 42:21 He has embellished the magnificent works of his wisdom, he is from everlasting to everlasting, nothing 
can be added to him, nothing taken away, he needs no one’s advice. 

Sir 42:22 How lovely, all his works, how dazzling to the eye! 

Sir 42:23 They all live and last for ever, and, whatever the circumstances, all obey. 

Sir 42:24 All things go in pairs, by opposites, he has not made anything imperfect: 

Sir 42:25 one thing complements the excellence of another. Who could ever grow tired of gazing at his glory? 

Sir 43:1 Pride of the heights, a clear vault of the sky — such is the beauty of the heavens, a glorious sight. 

Sir 43:2 The sun, as he emerges, proclaims at his rising, “How wonderful a thing, the work of the Most High!”. 

Sir 43:3 At his zenith, he parches the ground, who can withstand his blaze? 

Sir 43:4 We have to blow the furnace to produce any heat, the sun burns the mountains three times as much; 
breathing out blasts of fire, flashing his rays, he dazzles the eyes. 

Sir 43:5 Great is the Lord who created him and whose word speeds him on his course. 

Sir 43:6 And then the moon, ever punctual to mark the times, an everlasting sign: 

Sir 43:7 It is the moon that signals the feasts, a luminary that wanes after being full. 

Sir 43:8 The month derives its name from hers, she waxes wonderfully in her phases, banner of the hosts on 
high, shining in the vault of heaven. 

Sir 43:9 The glory of the stars makes the beauty of the sky, a brilliant adornment of the Lord on High. 

Sir 43:10 At the words of the Holy One they stand as he decrees, and never grow slack at their watch. 

Sir 43:1 1 See the rainbow and praise its Maker, so superbly beautiful in its splendour. 

Sir 43:12 Across the sky it forms a glorious arc drawn by the hands of the Most High. 

Sir 43:13 By his command he sends the snow, he speeds the lightning by his command. 



Sir 43:14 In the same way, his treasuries open and the clouds fly out like birds. 

Sir 43:15 His great power solidifies the clouds, then pulverises them into hail. 

Sir 43:16 at the sight of him, the mountains quake. At his will the south wind blows, or the storm from the north 
and the whirlwind. 

Sir 43:17 At the roar of his thunder, the earth writhes in labour, 

Sir 43:18 He sprinkles snow like birds alighting, it comes down like locusts settling. The eye marvels at the 
beauty of its whiteness, and the mind is amazed at its falling. 

Sir 43:19 Over the earth, like salt, he also pours hoarfrost, which, when it freezes, bristles like thorns. 

Sir 43:20 The cold wind blows from the north, and ice forms on the water; it forms on every piece of standing 
water, covering it like a breastplate. 

Sir 43:21 The wind swallows up the mountains and scorches the desert, like a fire it consumes the vegetation. 
Sir 43:22 But cloud brings swift healing, and dew brings joy after the heat. 

Sir 43:23 By his own resourcefulness he has tamed the abyss, and planted it with islands. 

Sir 43:24 Those who sail the sea tell of its dangers, their accounts fill our ears with amazement: 

Sir 43:25 for there too exist strange and wonderful works, animals of every kind and huge sea creatures. 

Sir 43:26 Thanks to God, his messenger reaches port, everything works out according to his word. 

Sir 43:27 We could say much more and still fall short; to put it concisely, “He is all”. 

Sir 43:28 Where shall we find sufficient power to glorify him, since he is the Great One, above all his works, 

Sir 43:29 the awe-inspiring Lord, stupendously great, and wonderful in his power? 

Sir 43:30 Exalt the Lord in your praises as high as you may — still he surpasses you. Exert all your strength 
when you exalt him, do not grow tired — you will never come to the end. 

Sir 43:31 Who has ever seen him to describe him? Who can glorify him as he deserves? 

Sir 43:32 Many mysteries remain even greater than these, for we have seen only a few of his works, 

Sir 43:33 the Lord himself having created all things and given wisdom to those who are devout. 

Sir 44:1 Next let us praise illustrious men, our ancestors in their successive generations. 

Sir 44:2 The Lord has created an abundance of glory, and displayed his greatness from earliest times. 

Sir 44:3 Some wielded authority as kings and were renowned for their strength; others were intelligent advisers 
and uttered prophetic sayings. 

Sir 44:4 Others directed the people by their advice, by their understanding of the popular mind, and by the wise 
words of their teaching; 

Sir 44:5 others composed musical melodies and set down ballads; 

Sir 44:6 others were rich and powerful, living peacefully in their homes. 

Sir 44:7 All these were honoured by their contemporaries and were the glory of their day. 

Sir 44:8 Some of them left a name behind them, so that their praises are still sung. 

Sir 44:9 While others have left no memory, and disappeared as though they had not existed. They are now as 
though they had never been, and so too, their children after them. 

Sir 44:10 But here is a list of illustrious men whose good works have not been forgotten. 

Sir 44:1 1 In their descendants they find a rich inheritance, their posterity. 

Sir 44:12 Their descendants stand by the commandments and, thanks to them, so do their children’s children. 
Sir 44:13 Their offspring will last for ever, their glory will not fade. 

Sir 44:14 Their bodies have been buried in peace, and their name lives on for all generations. 

Sir 44:15 The peoples will proclaim their wisdom, the assembly will celebrate their praises. 

Sir 44:16 Enoch pleased the Lord and was transferred to heaven, an example for the conversion of all 
generations. 

Sir 44:17 Noah was found perfectly upright, in the time of retribution he became the heir: because of him a 
remnant was preserved for the earth at the coming of the Flood. 

Sir 44:18 Everlasting covenants were made with him that never again should every living creature perish by 
flood. 

Sir 44:19 Abraham, the great ancestor of a host of nations, no one was ever his equal in glory. 

Sir 44:20 He observed the Law of the Most High, and entered into a covenant with him. He confirmed the 
covenant in his own flesh, and proved himself faithful under ordeal. 

Sir 44:21 The Lord therefore promised him on oath to bless the nations through his descendants, to multiply him 
like the dust on the ground, to exalt his descendants like the stars, and to give them the land as their heritage, 
from one sea to the other, from the River to the ends of the earth. 

Sir 44:22 To Isaac too, for the sake of Abraham his father, he assured 

Sir 44:23 the blessing of all humanity; he caused the covenant to rest on the head of Jacob. He confirmed him 
in his blessings and gave him the land as his inheritance; he divided it into portions, and shared it out among the 
twelve tribes. 

Sir 45:1 From Jacob’s stock he produced a generous man who found favour in the eyes of all humanity, beloved 



by God and people, Moses, of blessed memory. 

Sir 45:2 He made him the equal of the holy ones in glory and made him strong, to the terror of his enemies. 

Sir 45:3 By the word of Moses, he made prodigies cease and raised him high in the respect of kings; he gave 
him commandments for his people, and showed him something of his glory. 

Sir 45:4 For his loyalty and gentleness he sanctified him, choosing him alone out of all human beings; 

Sir 45:5 he allowed him to hear his voice, and led him into the darkness; 

Sir 45:6 he gave him the commandments face to face, the law of life and knowledge, to teach Jacob his 
ordinances and Israel his decrees. He raised up Aaron, a holy man like Moses, his brother, of the tribe of Levi. 
Sir 45:7 He made an everlasting covenant with him, and gave him the priesthood of the people. He adorned him 
with impressive vestments, he dressed him in a robe of glory. 

Sir 45:8 He clothed him in glorious perfection and invested him with rich ornaments, the breeches, the long 
robe, the ephod. 

Sir 45:9 To surround the robe he gave him pomegranates, and many gold bells all round to chime at every step, 
for their sound to be heard in the Temple as a reminder to the children of his people; 

Sir 45:10 and a sacred vestment of gold and aquamarine and scarlet, the work of an embroiderer; the pectoral 
of judgement, the urim and thummim, of plaited crimson, the work of a craftsman; 

Sir 45:1 1 precious stones cut like seals mounted in gold, the work of a jeweller, as a reminder with their 
engraved inscriptions of the number of the tribes of Israel; 

Sir 45:12 and a golden diadem on his turban, engraved with the seal of consecration; superb ornamentation, 
magnificent work, adornment to delight the eye. 

Sir 45:13 There had never been such lovely things before him, and no one else has ever put them on, but only 
his own sons, and his descendants for all time. 

Sir 45:14 His sacrifices were to be burnt entirely, twice each day and for ever. 

Sir 45:15 Moses consecrated him and anointed him with holy oil; and this was an everlasting covenant for him, 
and for his descendants as long as the heavens endure, that he should preside over worship, act as priest, and 
bless the people in the name of the Lord. 

Sir 45:16 He chose him out of all the living to offer sacrifices to the Lord, incense and perfume as a memorial to 
make expiation for the people. 

Sir 45:17 He entrusted him with his commandments, committed to him the statutes of the Law for him to teach 
Jacob his decrees and enlighten Israel on his Law. 

Sir 45:18 Others plotted against him, they were jealous of him in the desert, Dathan and Abiram and their men, 
Korah and his crew in fury and rage. 

Sir 45:19 The Lord saw it and was displeased, his raging fury made an end of them; he worked miracles on 
them, consuming them by his flaming fire. 

Sir 45:20 And he added to Aaron’s glory, he gave him an inheritance; he allotted him the offerings of the first- 
fruits, before all else, as much bread as he could want. 

Sir 45:21 Thus they eat the sacrifices of the Lord which he gave to him and his posterity. 

Sir 45:22 But of the people’s territory he inherits nothing, he alone of all the people has no share, “For I myself 
am your share and heritage”. 

Sir 45:23 Phinehas son of Eleazar is third in glory because of his zeal in the fear of the Lord, because he stood 
firm when the people revolted, with a staunch and courageous heart; and in this way made expiation for Israel. 
Sir 45:24 Hence a covenant of peace was sealed with him, making him governor of both sanctuary and people, 
and securing to him and his descendants the high priestly dignity for ever. 

Sir 45:25 There was also a covenant with David son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah, a royal succession by 
exclusively linear descent, but the succession of Aaron passes to all his descendants. 

Sir 45:26 May God endow your hearts with wisdom to judge his people uprightly, so that the virtues of your 
ancestors may never fade, and their glory may pass to all their descendants! 

Sir 46:1 Mighty in war was Joshua son of Nun, successor to Moses in the prophetic office, who well deserved 
his name, and was a great saviour of the chosen people, wreaking vengeance on the enemies who opposed 
him, and so bringing Israel into its inheritance. 

Sir 46:2 How splendid he was when, arms uplifted, he brandished his sword against cities! 

Sir 46:3 Who had ever shown such determination as his? He himself led the battles of the Lord. 

Sir 46:4 Was not the sun held back by his hand, and one day drawn out into two? 

Sir 46:5 He called on the Most High, the Mighty One, while pressing the enemies from all directions, and the 
great Lord answered him with hard and violent hailstones. 

Sir 46:6 He fell on that enemy nation, and at the Descent destroyed all resistance to make the nations 
acknowledge his warlike prowess and that he was waging war on behalf of the Lord. 

Sir 46:7 For he was a follower of the Mighty One, in the time of Moses showing his devotion, he and Caleb son 
of Jephunneh, by opposing the whole community, by preventing the people from sinning, and by silencing the 



mutters of rebellion. 

Sir 46:8 Hence these two alone were preserved out of six hundred thousand men on the march, and brought 
into their inheritance, into a land where milk and honey flow. 

Sir 46:9 And the Lord conferred strength on Caleb too, which stayed by him into old age, so that he could invest 
the highlands of the country which his descendants kept as their inheritance, 

Sir 46:10 so that every Israelite might see that it is good to follow the Lord. 

Sir 46:1 1 The Judges too, each when he was called, all men whose hearts were never disloyal, who never 
turned their backs on the Lord — may their memory be blessed! 

Sir 46:12 May their bones flourish again from the tomb, and may the names of those illustrious men be worthily 
borne by their sons! 

Sir 46:13 Samuel was the beloved of his Lord; prophet of the Lord, he instituted the kingdom, and anointed 
rulers over his people. 

Sir 46:14 By the Law of the Lord he judged the assembly, and the Lord watched over Jacob. 

Sir 46:15 By his loyalty he was recognised as a prophet, by his words he was known to be a trustworthy seer. 

Sir 46:16 He called on the Lord, the Mighty One, when his enemies pressed in from all directions, by offering a 
sucking lamb. 

Sir 46:17 And the Lord thundered from heaven, and made his voice heard in a rolling peal; 

Sir 46:18 he massacred the leaders of the enemy, and all the rulers of the Philistines. 

Sir 46:19 Before the time of his everlasting rest he bore witness to the Lord and his anointed, “Of no property, 
not even a pair of sandals, have I ever deprived a soul”. Nor did anyone accuse him. 

Sir 46:20 And, having fallen asleep, he prophesied again, warning the king of his end; he spoke from the depths 
of the earth in prophecy, to blot out the wickedness of the people. 

Sir 47:1 After him arose Nathan, to prophesy in the time of David. 

Sir 47:2 As the fat is set apart from the communion sacrifice, so was David chosen out of the Israelites. 

Sir 47:3 He played with lions as though with kids, and with bears as though with lambs. 

Sir 47:4 While still a boy, did he not slay the giant and take away the people’s shame, by hurling a stone from 
his sling and cutting short the boasting of Goliath? 

Sir 47:5 For he called on the Lord Most High, who gave strength to his right arm to put a mighty warrior to death 
and assert the strength of his own people. 

Sir 47:6 Hence they gave him credit for ten thousand, and praised him while they blessed the Lord, by offering 
him a crown of glory. 

Sir 47:7 For he destroyed the enemies on every front, he annihilated his foes, the Philistines, and crushed their 
strength for ever. 

Sir 47:8 In all his activities he gave thanks to the Holy One Most High in words of glory; he put all his heart into 
his songs out of love for his Creator. 

Sir 47:9 He placed singers before the altar, melodiously to sing; 

Sir 47:10 he gave the feasts their splendour, the festivals their solemn pomp, causing the Lord’s holy name to 
be praised and the sanctuary to resound from dawn. 

Sir 47:1 1 The Lord took away his sins, making his strength ever greater; he gave him a royal covenant, and a 
glorious throne in Israel. 

Sir 47:12 A wise son succeeded him, who lived content, thanks to him. 

Sir 47:13 Solomon reigned in a time of peace, and God gave him peace all round so that he could raise a house 
to his name and prepare an everlasting sanctuary. 

Sir 47:14 How wise you were despite your youth, like a river, brimming over with intelligence! 

Sir 47:15 Your mind ranged the earth, you filled it with mysterious sayings. 

Sir 47:16 Your name reached the distant islands, and you were loved for your peace. 

Sir 47:17 Your songs, your proverbs, your sayings and your answers were the wonder of the world. 

Sir 47:18 In the name of the Lord God, of him who is called the God of Israel, you amassed gold like so much 
tin, and made silver as common as lead. 

Sir 47:19 You abandoned your body to women, you became the slave of your appetites. 

Sir 47:20 You stained your honour, you profaned your stock, so bringing retribution on your children and 
affliction for your folly: 

Sir 47:21 the empire split in two, from Ephraim arose a rebel kingdom. 

Sir 47:22 But the Lord never goes back on his mercy, never cancels any of his words, will neither deny offspring 
to his elect nor stamp out the line of the man who loved him. And hence, he has granted a remnant to Jacob and 
to David a root sprung from him. 

Sir 47:23 Solomon rested with his ancestors, leaving one of his stock as his successor, the stupidest member of 
the nation, brainless Rehoboam, who drove the people to rebel. 

Sir 47:24 Next, Jeroboam son of Nebat, who made Israel sin, and set Ephraim on the way of evil; from then on 



their sins multiplied so excessively as to drive them out of their country; 

Sir 47:25 for they tried out every kind of wickedness, until vengeance overtook them. 

Sir 48:1 Then the prophet Elijah arose like a fire, his word flaring like a torch. 

Sir 48:2 It was he who brought famine on them and decimated them in his zeal. 

Sir 48:3 By the word of the Lord he shut up the heavens, three times also he brought down fire. 

Sir 48:4 How glorious you were in your miracles, Elijah! Has anyone reason to boast as you have? - 
Sir 48:5 rousing a corpse from death, from Sheol, by the word of the Most High; 

Sir 48:6 dragging kings down to destruction, and high dignitaries from their beds; 

Sir 48:7 hearing a rebuke on Sinai and decrees of punishment on Horeb; 

Sir 48:8 anointing kings as avengers, and prophets to succeed you; 

Sir 48:9 taken up in the whirlwind of fire, in a chariot with fiery horses; 

Sir 48:10 designated in the prophecies of doom to allay God’s wrath before the fury breaks, to turn the hearts of 
fathers towards their children, and to restore the tribes of Jacob. 

Sir 48:1 1 Blessed, those who will see you, and those who have fallen asleep in love; for we too shall certainly 
have life. 

Sir 48:12 Such was Elijah, who was enveloped in a whirlwind; and Elisha was filled with his spirit; throughout his 
life no ruler could shake him, and no one could subdue him. 

Sir 48:13 No task was too hard for him, and even in death his body prophesied. 

Sir 48:14 In his lifetime he performed wonders, and in death his works were marvellous. 

Sir 48:15 Despite all this the people did not repent, nor did they give up their sins, until they were herded out of 
their country and scattered all over the earth; 

Sir 48:16 only a few of the people were left, with a ruler of the House of David. Some of them did what pleased 
the Lord, others piled sin on sin. 

Sir 48:17 Hezekiah fortified his city, and laid on a water-supply inside it; with iron he tunnelled through the rock 
and constructed storage-tanks. 

Sir 48:18 In his days Sennacherib invaded and sent Rabshakeh; he lifted his hand against Zion, and boasted 
loudly in his arrogance. 

Sir 48:19 Then their hearts and hands trembled, they felt the pangs of a woman in labour, 

Sir 48:20 but they called on the merciful Lord, stretching out their hands towards him. Swiftly the Holy One 
heard them from heaven and delivered them by the agency of Isaiah; 

Sir 48:21 he struck the camp of the Assyrians and his Angel annihilated them. 

Sir 48:22 For Hezekiah did what is pleasing to the Lord, and was steadfast in the ways of David his father, 

enjoined on him by the prophet Isaiah, a great man trustworthy in his vision. 

Sir 48:23 In his days the sun moved back; he prolonged the life of the king. 

Sir 48:24 In the power of the spirit he saw the last things, he comforted the mourners of Zion, 

Sir 48:25 he revealed the future to the end of time, and hidden things long before they happened. 

Sir 49:1 The memory of Josiah is like blended incense prepared by the perfumer’s art; it is as sweet as honey to 
all mouths, and like music at a wine feast. 

Sir 49:2 He took the right course, of converting the people, he rooted out the iniquitous abominations, 

Sir 49:3 he set his heart on the Lord, in godless times he upheld the cause of religion. 

Sir 49:4 Apart from David, Hezekiah and Josiah, they all heaped wrong on wrong, they abandoned the Law of 

the Most High: the kings of Judah disappeared; 

Sir 49:5 for they handed their power over to others and their honour to a foreign nation. 

Sir 49:6 The holy, chosen city was burnt down, her streets were left deserted, 

Sir 49:7 as Jeremiah had predicted; for they had ill-treated him, though consecrated a prophet in his mother’s 
womb, to tear up and afflict and destroy, but also to build up and to plant. 

Sir 49:8 Ezekiel saw a vision of glory which God showed to him above the chariot of the great winged creatures, 

Sir 49:9 for he mentioned the enemies in the downpour to the advantage of those who follow the right way. 

Sir 49:10 As for the twelve prophets, may their bones flower again from the tomb, since they have comforted 
Jacob and redeemed him in faith and hope. 

Sir 49:1 1 How shall we extol Zerubbabel? He was like a signet ring on the right hand, 

Sir 49:12 so too was Joshua son of Jozadak; they who in their days built the Temple and raised a sanctuary 
sacred to the Lord, destined to everlasting glory. 

Sir 49:13 Great too is the memory of Nehemiah, who rebuilt our walls which lay in ruins, erected the bolted 
gates and rebuilt our houses. 

Sir 49:14 No one else has ever been created on earth to equal Enoch, for he was taken up from earth. 

Sir 49:15 And no one else ever born has been like Joseph, the leader of his brothers, the prop of his people; his 
bones received a visitation. 

Sir 49:16 Shem and Seth were the most honoured of men, but above every living creature is Adam. 



Sir 50:1 It was the High Priest Simon son of Onias who repaired the Temple during his lifetime and in his day 
fortified the sanctuary. 

Sir 50:2 He laid the foundations of double depth, the high buttresses of the Temple precincts. 

Sir 50:3 In his day the pool was excavated, a reservoir as huge as the sea. 

Sir 50:4 Anxious to save the people from ruin, he fortified the city against siege. 

Sir 50:5 How splendid he was with the people thronging round him, when he emerged from the curtained shrine, 
Sir 50:6 like the morning star among the clouds, like the moon at the full, 

Sir 50:7 like the sun shining on the Temple of the Most High, like the rainbow gleaming against brilliant clouds, 
Sir 50:8 like a rose in springtime, like a lily by a spring, like a branch of the incense tree in summer, 

Sir 50:9 like fire and incense in the censer, like a massive golden vessel encrusted with every kind of precious 
stone, 

Sir 50:10 like an olive tree loaded with fruit, like a cypress soaring to the clouds; 

Sir 50:1 1 when he took his ceremonial robe and put on his magnificent ornaments, when he went up to the holy 
altar and filled the sanctuary precincts with his grandeur; 

Sir 50:12 when he received the portions from the hands of the priests, himself standing by the altar hearth, 
crowned with the circle of his brothers, as a cedar of Lebanon is by its foliage, as though surrounded by the 
trunks of palm trees. 

Sir 50:13 When all the sons of Aaron in their glory, with the offerings of the Lord in their hands, stood before the 
whole assembly of Israel, 

Sir 50:14 while he completed the rites at the altars, nobly presenting the offerings to the Almighty, Most High! 

Sir 50:15 He would reach out his hand to the cup and pour a libation of wine, pouring it at the foot of the altar, a 
fragrance pleasing to the Most High, King of All; 

Sir 50:16 then the sons of Aaron would shout and blow their metal trumpets, making a mighty sound ring out as 
a reminder before the Most High; 

Sir 50:17 and immediately the people all together would fall on their faces to the ground, in adoration of their 
Lord, the Almighty, God Most High, 

Sir 50:18 and with the cantors chanting their hymns of praise. Sweet was the melody of all these voices, 

Sir 50:19 as the people pleaded with the Lord Most High and prayed in the presence of the Merciful, until the 
service of the Lord was completed and the ceremony at an end. 

Sir 50:20 Then he would come down and raise his hands over the whole assembly of the Israelites, to give them 
the Lord’s blessing from his lips, being privileged to pronounce his name; 

Sir 50:21 and once again the people would bow low to receive the blessing of the Most High. 

Sir 50:22 And now bless the God of all things, the doer of great deeds everywhere, who has exalted our days 
from the womb and has acted mercifully towards us. 

Sir 50:23 May he grant us cheerful hearts and bring peace in our time, in Israel for ages on ages. 

Sir 50:24 May his mercy be faithfully with us, may he redeem us in our own times! 

Sir 50:25 There are two nations that my soul detests, the third is not a nation at all: 

Sir 50:26 the inhabitants of Mount Seir, the Philistines, and the stupid people living at Shechem. 

Sir 50:27 Instruction in wisdom and knowledge is what has been written in this book by Jesus son of Sira 
Eleazar of Jerusalem, who has poured a rain of wisdom from his heart. 

Sir 50:28 Blessed is he who devotes his time to these and grows wise by taking them to heart! 

Sir 50:29 If he practises them he will be strong enough for anything, since the light of the Lord is his path. 

Sir 51:1 I shall give thanks to you, Lord and King, and praise you, God my Saviour, I give thanks to your name; 
Sir 51 :2 for you have been my guard and support and redeemed my body from destruction, from the snare of 
the lying tongue, from lips that fabricate falsehood; in the presence of my assailants, you were on my side; you 
have been my support, you have redeemed me, 

Sir 51 :3 true to your abounding kindness — and the greatness of your name — you liberated me from the fangs 
of those seeking to devour me, from the clutches of those seeking my life, from the many ordeals which I have 
endured, 

Sir 51 :4 from the stifling heat which hemmed me in, from the heart of a fire which I had not kindled, 

Sir 51 :5 from deep in the belly of Sheol, 

Sir 51 :6 treacherous denunciations to the king. My soul has been close to death, my life had gone down to the 
brink of Sheol. 

Sir 51 :7 I was completely surrounded, there was no one to help me; I looked for someöne to help me, there was 
no one. 

Sir 51 :8 Then I remembered your mercy, Lord, and your deeds from earliest times, how you deliver those who 
wait for you patiently, and save them from the clutches of their enemies. 

Sir 51 :9 And I sent up my plea from the earth, I begged to be delivered from death. 

Sir 51:10 I called on the Lord, the father of my Lord, “Do not desert me in the days of ordeal, in the days of the 



proud, when we are helpless. I shall praise your name unceasingly and gratefully sing its praises”. 

Sir 51:11 And my plea was heard, for you saved me from destruction, you delivered me from that time of evil. 

Sir 51:12 And therefore I shall thank you and praise you, and bless the name of the Lord. 

Sir 51:13 When I was still a youth, before I went travelling, in my prayers I asked outright for wisdom. 

Sir 51:14 Outside the sanctuary I would pray for her, and to the last I shall continue to seek her. 

Sir 51:15 From her blossoming to the ripening of her grape my heart has taken its delight in her. My foot has 
pursued a straight path, I have sought her ever since my youth. 

Sir 51:16 By bowing my ear a little, I have received her, and have found much instruction. 

Sir 51:17 Thanks to her I have advanced; glory be to him who has given me wisdom! 

Sir 51:18 For I was determined to put her into practice, have earnestly pursued the good, and shall not be put to 
shame. 

Sir 51:19 My soul has fought to possess her, I have been scrupulous in keeping the Law; I have stretched out 
my hands to heaven and bewailed how little I knew of her; 

Sir 51 :20 I have directed my soul towards her, and in purity I have found her; having my heart fixed on her from 
the outset, I shall never be deserted; 

Sir 51 :21 my very core having yearned to discover her, I have now acquired a good possession. 

Sir 51 :22 In reward the Lord has given me a tongue with which I shall sing his praises. 

Sir 51 :23 Come close to me, you ignorant, take your place in my school. 

Sir 51 :24 Why complain about lacking these things when your souls are so thirsty for them? 

Sir 51 :25 I have opened my mouth, I have said: “Buy her without money, 

Sir 51 :26 put your necks under her yoke, let your souls receive instruction, she is near, within your reach”. 

Sir 51 :27 See for yourselves: how slight my efforts have been to win so much peace. 

Sir 51 :28 Buy instruction with a large sum of silver, thanks to her you will gain much gold. 

Sir 51 :29 May your souls rejoice in the mercy of the Lord, may you never be ashamed of praising him. 

Sir 51 :30 Do your work before the appointed time and at the appointed time he will give you your reward. 
(Subscript:) Wisdom of Jesus, son of Sira. 

Isa 1:1 The vision of Isaiah son of Amoz concerning Judah and Jerusalem, which he received in the reigns of 
Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah kings of Judah. 

Isa 1 :2 Listen, you heavens; earth, attend, for Yahweh is speaking, “I have reared children and brought them up, 
but they have rebelled against me. 

Isa 1:3 The ox knows its owner and the donkey its master’s crib; Israel does not know, my people do not 
understand”. 

Isa 1:4 Disaster, sinful nation, people weighed down with guilt, race of wrong-doers, perverted children! They 
have abandoned Yahweh, despised the Holy One of Israel, they have turned away from him. 

Isa 1:5 Where shall I strike you next, if you persist in treason? The whole head is sick, the whole heart is 
diseased, 

Isa 1:6 from the sole of the foot to the head there is nothing healthy: only wounds, bruises and open sores not 
dressed, not bandaged, not soothed with ointment, 

Isa 1 :7 your country a desolation, your towns burnt down, your soil, foreigners lay it waste before your eyes, a 
desolation like devastation by foreigners. 

Isa 1 :8 The daughter of Zion is left like a shanty in a vineyard, like a shed in a cucumber field, like a city 
besieged. 

Isa 1 :9 Had Yahweh Sabaoth not left us a few survivors, we should be like Sodom, we should be the same as 
Gomorrah. 

Isa 1:10 Hear what Yahweh says, you rulers of Sodom; listen to what our God teaches, you people of 
Gomorrah. 

Isa 1:11 “What are your endless sacrifices to me?”. says Yahweh. “I am sick of burnt offerings of rams and the fat 
of calves. I take no pleasure in the blood of bulls and lambs and goats. 

Isa 1:12 When you come and present yourselves before me, who has asked you to trample through my courts? 
Isa 1:13 Bring no more futile cereal offerings, the smoke from them fills me with disgust. New Moons, Sabbaths, 
assemblies — 1 cannot endure solemnity combined with guilt. 

Isa 1:14 Your New Moons and your meetings I utterly detest; to me they are a burden I am tired of bearing. 

Isa 1:15 When you stretch out your hands I turn my eyes away. You may multiply your prayers, I shall not be 
listening. Your hands are covered in blood, 

Isa 1:16 wash, make yourselves clean. Take your wrong-doing out of my sight. Cease doing evil. 

Isa 1:17 Learn to do good, search for justice, discipline the violent, be just to the orphan, plead for the widow. 

Isa 1:18 “Come, let us talk this over”, says Yahweh. “Though your sins are like scarlet, they shall be white as 
snow; though they are red as crimson, they shall be like wool. 

Isa 1:19 If you are willing to obey, you shall eat the good things of the earth. 



Isa 1 :20 But if you refuse and rebel, the sword shall eat you instead — for Yahweh’s mouth has spoken”. 

Isa 1 :21 The faithful city, what a harlot she has become! Zion, once full of fair judgement, where saving justice 
used to dwell, but now assassins! 

Isa 1 :22 Your silver has turned into dross, your wine is watered. 

Isa 1:23 Your princes are rebels, accomplices of brigands. All of them greedy for presents and eager for bribes, 
they show no justice to the orphan, and the widow’s cause never reaches them. 

Isa 1:24 Hence, the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth, the Mighty One of Israel, says this, “Disaster, I shall get the better of 
my enemies, I shall avenge myself on my foes. 

Isa 1 :25 “I shall turn my hand against you, I shall purge your dross as though with potash, I shall remove all your 
alloy. 

Isa 1 :26 “And I shall restore your judges as at first, your counsellors as in bygone days, after which you will be 
called City of Saving Justice, Faithful City”. 

Isa 1 :27 Zion will be redeemed by fair judgement, and those who return, by saving justice. 

Isa 1:28 Rebels and sinners alike will be destroyed, and those who abandon Yahweh will perish. 

Isa 1 :29 How ashamed you will be of the terebinths which gave you such delight; and how you will blush for the 
gardens which you chose! 

Isa 1 :30 For you will be like a terebinth with faded leaves, like a garden without water; 

Isa 1:31 the strong will become like tinder, his work like the spark; both will go up in flames together, with no one 
to put them out. 

Isa 2:1 The vision of Isaiah son of Amoz, concerning Judah and Jerusalem. 

Isa 2:2 It will happen in the final days that the mountain of Yahweh’s house will rise higher than the mountains 
and tower above the heights. Then all the nations will stream to it, 

Isa 2:3 many peoples will come to it and say, “Come, let us go up to the mountain of Yahweh, to the house of 
the God of Jacob that he may teach us his ways so that we may walk in his paths”. For the Law will issue from 
Zion and the word of Yahweh from Jerusalem. 

Isa 2:4 Then he will judge between the nations and arbitrate between many peoples. They will hammer their 
swords into ploughshares and their spears into sickles. Nation will not lift sword against nation, no longer will 
they learn how to make war. 

Isa 2:5 House of Jacob, come, let us walk in Yahweh’s light. 

Isa 2:6 You have rejected your people, the House of Jacob, for it has long been full of sorcerers like the 
Philistines, and is overrun with foreigners. 

Isa 2:7 The country is full of silver and gold and treasures unlimited, the country is full of horses, its chariots are 
unlimited; 

Isa 2:8 the country is full of idols. They bow down before the work of their hands, before what their own fingers 
have made. 

Isa 2:9 Human nature has been humbled, humankind brought low: do not raise them again! 

Isa 2:10 Go into the rock, hide in the dust, in terror of Yahweh, at the brilliance of his majesty, when he arises to 
make the earth quake. 

Isa 2:11 Human pride will lower its eyes, human arrogance will be humbled, and Yahweh alone will be exalted, 
on that day. 

Isa 2:12 That will be a day for Yahweh Sabaoth, for all who are majestic and haughty, for all who are proud, to 
be brought low, 

Isa 2:13 for all the cedars of Lebanon, high and proud, and for all the oaks of Bashan; 

Isa 2:14 for all the high mountains and for all the proud hills; 

Isa 2:15 for every lofty tower and for every towering wall; 

Isa 2:16 for all the ships of Tarshish and for everything held precious. 

Isa 2:17 Human pride will be humbled, human arrogance brought low, and Yahweh alone will be exalted, on that 
day. 

Isa 2:18 When the idols all disappear, 

Isa 2:19 they will go into the caverns of the rocks and into the fissures of the earth in terror of Yahweh, at the 
brilliance of his majesty, when he arises to make the earth quake. 

Isa 2:20 That day, people will fling to moles and bats the silver idols and golden idols which have been made for 
them to worship, 

Isa 2:21 and go into the crevices of the rocks and the clefts in the cliffs, in terror of Yahweh, at the brilliance of 
his majesty, when he arises to make the earth quake. 

Isa 2:22 Have no more to do with humankind, which has only the breath in its nostrils. How much is this worth? 
Isa 3:1 Now the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth is about to deprive Jerusalem and Judah of resources and provisions — 
all reserves of food, all reserves of water- 
Isa 3:2 of hero, warrior, judge, prophet, diviner, elder, 



Isa 3:3 captain, dignitary, counsellor, architect, soothsayer. 

Isa 3:4 “I shall give them boys for princes, raw lads to rule over them”. 

Isa 3:5 People will be ill-treated by one another, each by his neighbour; the young will insult the aged, and the 
low, the respected. 

Isa 3:6 Yes, a man will catch hold of his brother in their father’s house, to say, “You have a cloak, so you be 
leader, and rule this heap of ruins”. 

Isa 3:7 And, that day, the other will protest, “I am no healer; in my house there is neither food nor clothing; do 
not make me leader of the people”. 

Isa 3:8 For Jerusalem has collapsed and Judah has fallen, because their words and deeds affront Yahweh and 
insult his glorious gaze. 

Isa 3:9 Their complacency bears witness against them, they parade their sin like Sodom; they do not conceal it, 
all the worse for them, for they have hatched their own downfall. 

Isa 3:10 Say, “Blessed the upright, for he will feed on the fruit of his deeds; 

Isa 3:11 woe to the wicked, it will go ill with him, for he will be treated as his actions deserve”. 

Isa 3:12 O my people, their oppressors pillage them and extortioners rule over them! O my people, your rulers 
mislead you and efface the paths you ought to follow! 

Isa 3:13 Yahweh has risen to accuse, is standing to pass judgement on the people. 

Isa 3:14 Yahweh is about to try the elders and the princes of his people, “You are the ones who have ravaged 
the vineyard, the spoils of the poor are in your houses. 

Isa 3:15 By what right do you crush my people and grind the faces of the poor?”. says the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth. 
Isa 3:16 Yahweh says: Because Zion’s daughters are proud and walk with heads held high and enticing eyes — 
with mincing steps they go, jingling the bangles on their feet- 

Isa 3:17 the Lord will give Zion’s daughters scabby heads, Yahweh will lay their foreheads bare. 

Isa 3:18 That day the Lord will take away the ornamental chains, medallions, crescents, 

Isa 3:19 pendants, bracelets, trinkets, 

Isa 3:20 diadems, ankle-chains, necklaces, scent bottles, amulets, 

Isa 3:21 finger-rings, nose-rings, 

Isa 3:22 party dresses, cloaks, scarves, purses, 

Isa 3:23 mirrors, linen clothes, turbans and mantillas. 

Isa 3:24 Then, instead of perfume, a stink; instead of belt, a rope, instead of hair elaborately dressed, a shaven 
scalp, instead of gorgeous clothes, sacking round the waist, and brand marks instead of beauty. 

Isa 3:25 Your men will fall by the sword, your warriors in battle, 

Isa 3:26 and her gates will moan and mourn; she will sit on the ground, deserted. 

Isa 4:1 That day, seven women will catch hold of one man and say, “We will eat our own food, and wear our 
own clothing, but just let us bear your name. Take our disgrace away”. 

Isa 4:2 That day, Yahweh’s seedling will turn to beauty and glory, what the earth brings forth will turn to the 
pride and ornament of Israel’s survivors. 

Isa 4:3 Those who are left in Zion and remain in Jerusalem will be called holy, all those in Jerusalem noted 
down to live. 

Isa 4:4 When the Lord has washed away the filth of Zion’s daughters and with the wind of judgement and the 
wind of burning cleansed Jerusalem of the blood shed in her, 

Isa 4:5 Yahweh will create, over every house on Mount Zion and over those who assemble there, a cloud by 
day, and by night smoke with the brightness of a flaring fire. For over all will be the Glory as canopy 

Isa 4:6 and tent to give shade by day from the heat, refuge and shelter from the storm and the rain. 

Isa 5:1 Let me sing my beloved the song of my friend for his vineyard. My beloved had a vineyard on a fertile 
hillside. 

Isa 5:2 He dug it, cleared it of stones, and planted it with red grapes. In the middle he built a tower, he hewed a 
press there too. He expected it to yield fine grapes: wild grapes were all it yielded. 

Isa 5:3 And now, citizens of Jerusalem and people of Judah, I ask you to judge between me and my vineyard. 
Isa 5:4 What more could I have done for my vineyard that I have not done? Why, when I expected it to yield fine 
grapes, has it yielded wild ones? 

Isa 5:5 Very well, I shall tell you what I am going to do to my vineyard: I shall take away its hedge, for it to be 
grazed on, and knock down its wall, for it to be trampled on. 

Isa 5:6 I shall let it go to waste, unpruned, undug, overgrown by brambles and thorn-bushes, and I shall 
command the clouds to rain no rain on it. 

Isa 5:7 Now, the vineyard of Yahweh Sabaoth is the House of Israel, and the people of Judah the plant he 
cherished. He expected fair judgement, but found injustice, uprightness, but found cries of distress. 

Isa 5:8 Woe to those who add house to house and join field to field until there is nowhere left and they are the 
sole inhabitants of the country. 



Isa 5:9 Yahweh Sabaoth has sworn this in my hearing, “Many houses will be brought to ruin, great and fine ones 
left untenanted; 

Isa 5:10 for ten acres of vineyard will yield only one barrel, and ten bushel of seed will yield only one bushel”. 

Isa 5:1 1 Woe to those who get up early to go after strong drink, and stay up late at night inflamed with wine. 

Isa 5:12 Nothing but harp and lyre, tambourine and pipe, and wine for their drinking bouts. Never a thought for 
the works of Yahweh, never a glance for what his hands have done. 

Isa 5:13 That is why my people is in exile, for want of perception; her dignitaries starving, her populace parched 
with thirst. 

Isa 5:14 That is why Sheol opens wide its throat and gapes with measureless jaw and down go her noblemen 
and populace and her loud revellers merry to the last! 

Isa 5:15 Human nature has been humbled, humankind brought low, and the eyes of the proud have been 
humbled. 

Isa 5:16 Yahweh Sabaoth is the more respected for his judgement, God the Holy One has displayed his 
holiness by his justice! 

Isa 5:17 Now the lambs will graze in their old pastures, and the fields laid waste by fat cattle will feed the kids. 
Isa 5:18 Woe to those who drag guilt along by the reins of duplicity, drag along sin as though with a cart rope; 

Isa 5:19 to those who say, “Why doesn’t he do his work quickly so that we can see it; why doesn’t the Holy One 

of Israel’s design hurry up and come true so that we can experience it?”. 

Isa 5:20 Woe to those who call what is bad, good, and what is good, bad, who substitute darkness for light and 
light for darkness, who substitute bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter. 

Isa 5:21 Woe to those who think themselves wise and believe themselves enlightened. 

Isa 5:22 Woe to those whose might lies in wine bibbing, their heroism in mixing strong drinks, 

Isa 5:23 who acquit the guilty for a bribe and deny justice to the upright. 

Isa 5:24 Yes, as the flame devours the stubble, as the straw flares up and disappears, their root will be like 

decay and their shoot be carried off like dust, for having rejected the law of Yahweh Sabaoth, for having 
despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. 

Isa 5:25 This is why Yahweh’s anger has blazed out against his people; and he has raised his hand against 
them to strike them; why the mountains have shuddered and why corpses are lying like dung in the streets. After 
all this, his anger is not spent. No, his hand is still raised! 

Isa 5:26 He hoists a signal for a distant nation, he whistles them up from the ends of the earth; and see how 
swift, how fleet they come! 

Isa 5:27 None of them tired, none of them stumbling, none of them asleep or drowsy, none of them with belt 
unfastened, none of them with broken sandal-strap. 

Isa 5:28 Their arrows are sharpened, their bows all strung, their horses’ hoofs you would think were flint and 
their wheels, a whirlwind! 

Isa 5:29 Their roar is like that of a lioness, like fierce young lions they roar, growling they seize their prey and 
carry it off, with no one to prevent it, 

Isa 5:30 growling at it, that day, like the growling of the sea. Only look at the country: darkness and distress, and 
the light turned to darkness by the clouds. 

Isa 6:1 In the year of King Uzziah’s death I saw the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne; his train filled the 
sanctuary. 

Isa 6:2 Above him stood seraphs, each one with six wings: two to cover its face, two to cover its feet and two for 
flying; 

Isa 6:3 and they were shouting these words to each other: Holy, holy, holy is Yahweh Sabaoth. His glory fills the 
whole earth. 

Isa 6:4 The door-posts shook at the sound of their shouting, and the Temple was full of smoke. 

Isa 6:5 Then I said: “Woe is me! I am lost, for I am a man of unclean lips and I live among a people of unclean 
lips, and my eyes have seen the King, Yahweh Sabaoth”. 

Isa 6:6 Then one of the seraphs flew to me, holding in its hand a live coal which it had taken from the altar with 
a pair of tongs. 

Isa 6:7 With this it touched my mouth and said: “Look, this has touched your lips, your guilt has been removed 
and your sin forgiven”. 

Isa 6:8 I then heard the voice of the Lord saying: “Whom shall I send? Who will go for us?”. And I said, “Here am 
I, send me”. 

Isa 6:9 He said: “Go, and say to this people, ‘Listen and listen, but never understand! Look and look, but never 
perceive!’. 

Isa 6:10 Make this people’s heart coarse, make their ears dull, shut their eyes tight, or they will use their eyes to 
see, use their ears to hear, use their heart to understand, and change their ways and be healed”. 

Isa 6:11 I then said, “Until when, Lord?”. He replied, “Until towns are in ruins and deserted, houses untenanted 



and a great desolation reigns in the land, 

Isa 6:12 and Yahweh has driven the people away and the country is totally abandoned. 

Isa 6:13 And suppose one-tenth of them are left in it, that will be stripped again, like the terebinth, like the oak, 
cut back to the stock; their stock is a holy seed”. 

Isa 7:1 In the reign of Ahaz son of Jotham, son of Uzziah king of Judah, Razon king of Aram advanced on 
Jerusalem with Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel, to attack it; but he was unable to attack it. 

Isa 7:2 The House of David was informed: “Aram has halted in Ephraimite territory”. At this, his heart and his 
people’s hearts shook like forest trees shaking in the wind. 

Isa 7:3 Yahweh then said to Isaiah, “Go out with your son Shear-Jashub, and meet Ahaz at the end of the 
conduit of the upper pool, on the road to the Fuller’s Field, 

Isa 7:4 and say to him, ‘Pay attention and keep calm. Do not be frightened or demoralised by these two 
smouldering sticks of firewood, by the fierce anger of Razon, Aram and the son of Remaliah, 

Isa 7:5 or because Aram, Ephraim and the son of Remaliah have been plotting against you and saying: 

Isa 7:6 Let us mount an attack on Judah, destroy it, force it onto our side and install the son of Tabeel there as 
king. 

Isa 7:7 ‘Lord Yahweh says this: This will not happen, it will never occur, 

Isa 7:8 for the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Razon; another sixty-five years, and 
Ephraim will cease to be a people. 

Isa 7:9 The head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is the son of Remaliah. If you will not take 
your stand on me you will not stand firm’”. 

Isa 7:10 Yahweh spoke to Ahaz again and said: 

Isa 7:1 1 Ask Yahweh your God for a sign, either in the depths of Sheol or in the heights above. 

Isa 7:12 But Ahaz said, “I will not ask. I will not put Yahweh to the test”. 

Isa 7:13 He then said: Listen now, House of David: are you not satisfied with trying human patience that you 
should try my God’s patience too? 

Isa 7:14 The Lord will give you a sign in any case: It is this: the young woman is with child and will give birth to a 
son whom she will call Immanuel. 

Isa 7:15 On curds and honey will he feed until he knows how to refuse the bad and choose the good. 

Isa 7:16 Before the child knows how to refuse the bad and choose the good, the lands whose two kings are 
frightening you will be deserted. 

Isa 7:17 Yahweh will bring times for you, your people and your ancestral House, such as have not been seen 
since Ephraim broke away from Judah (the king of Assyria). 

Isa 7:18 When that day comes, Yahweh will whistle up mosquitoes from the distant streams of Egypt and bees 
from the land of Assyria, 

Isa 7:19 and they will all come and settle on the streams in the gullies, in the holes in the rocks, on all the thorn- 
bushes and on all the water-points. 

Isa 7:20 That day the Lord will shave, with a razor hired from the other side of the River (with the king of 
Assyria), the head and the hair of the leg, and take off the beard, too. 

Isa 7:21 When that day comes, each man will raise one heifer and two sheep, 

Isa 7:22 and because of the abundant milk they give (on curds will he feed) all who are left in the country will 
feed on curds and honey. 

Isa 7:23 When that day comes, wherever there used to be a thousand vines worth a thousand pieces of silver, 
all will be brambles and thorn-bushes; 

Isa 7:24 to be ventured into only with arrows and bow, for the country will be nothing but brambles and thorn- 
bushes. 

Isa 7:25 No more will you venture on any hillside formerly under the hoe for fear of the brambles and thorn- 
bushes; it will be fit only for pasturing the cattle, a tramping-ground for sheep. 

Isa 8:1 Yahweh said to me, “Take a large tablet and on it with an ordinary stylus write, ‘Maher-Shalal-Hash- 
Baz’. 

Isa 8:2 And take reliable witnesses, the priest Uriah and Zechariah son of Jeberechiah”. 

Isa 8:3 I then had intercourse with the prophetess, who then conceived and gave birth to a son. Yahweh said to 
me, “Call him Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz, 

Isa 8:4 for before the child knows how to say ‘mother’ or ‘father’, the wealth of Damascus and the booty of 
Samaria will be carried away while the king of Assyria looks on”. 

Isa 8:5 Yahweh spoke to me again and said, 

Isa 8:6 “Since this people has rejected the waters of Shiloah which flow smoothly, and has trembled before 
Razon and the son of Remaliah, 

Isa 8:7 now, against it, the Lord will bring the mighty, swelling waters of the River (the king of Assyria and all his 
glory); the River will flood up all its channels and overflow all its banks; 



Isa 8:8 it will flow into Judah, flooding everything and passing on; it will reach right up to the neck, and the 
spreading of its wings will cover the whole extent of your country, Immanuel! 

Isa 8:9 Realise this, peoples, and be afraid, listen, all members of far-off nations! Arm yourselves yet be afraid! 
Arm yourselves yet be afraid! 

Isa 8:10 Devise plans as you may: they will come to nothing! Make what pronouncements you like; it will not 
come about! For God is with us!”. 

Isa 8:11 For this was how Yahweh spoke to me when his hand seized hold of me and he taught me not to follow 
the path of this people, saying, 

Isa 8:12 “Do not call conspiracy all that this people calls conspiracy; do not dread what they dread, have no fear 
of that. 

Isa 8:13 Yahweh Sabaoth is the one you will proclaim holy, him you will dread, him you will fear. 

Isa 8:14 He will be a sanctuary, a stumbling-stone, a rock to trip up the two Houses of Israel; a snare and a trap 
for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 

Isa 8:15 over which many of them will stumble, fall and be broken, be ensnared and made captive. 

Isa 8:16 Bind up the testimony, seal the instruction in the heart of my disciples”. 

Isa 8:17 My trust is in Yahweh who hides his face from the House of Jacob; I put my hope in him. 

Isa 8:18 Look, I and the children whom Yahweh has given me shall become signs and portents in Israel on 
behalf of Yahweh Sabaoth who dwells on Mount Zion. 

Isa 8:19 And should people say to you, “Go and consult ghosts and wizards that whisper and mutter” — a people 
should certainly consult its gods and the dead on behalf of the living! 

Isa 8:20 As regards instruction and testimony, without doubt this is how they will talk, and hence there will be no 
dawn for them. 

Isa 8:21 Oppressed and starving he will wander the country; and, once starving, he will become frenzied and 
curse his king and his God; turning his gaze upward, 

Isa 8:22 then down to earth, there will be only anguish, gloom, the confusion of night, swirling darkness. 

Isa 8:23 For is not everything dark as night for a country in distress? As the past humbled the land of Zebulun 
and the land of Naphtali, so the future will glorify the Way of the Sea, beyond the Jordan, the territory of the 
nations. 

Isa 9:1 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; on the inhabitants of a country in shadow 
dark as death light has blazed forth. 

Isa 9:2 You have enlarged the nation, you have increased its joy; they rejoice before you as people rejoice at 
harvest time, as they exult when they are dividing the spoils. 

Isa 9:3 For the yoke that weighed on it, the bar across its shoulders, the rod of its oppressor, these you have 
broken as on the day of Midian. 

Isa 9:4 For all the footgear clanking over the ground and all the clothing rolled in blood, will be burnt, will be food 
for the flames. 

Isa 9:5 For a son has been born for us, a son has been given to us, and dominion has been laid on his 
shoulders; and this is the name he has been given, “Wonder-Counsellor, Mighty-God, Eternal-Father, Prince-of- 
Peace” 

Isa 9:6 to extend his dominion in boundless peace, over the throne of David and over his kingdom to make it 

secure and sustain it in fair judgement and integrity. From this time onwards and for ever, the jealous love of 

Yahweh Sabaoth will do this. 

Isa 9:7 The Lord has launched a word at Jacob and it has fallen on Israel; 

Isa 9:8 and the people will all soon know it, Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, who say in the pride of their 
arrogant hearts, 

Isa 9:9 “The bricks have fallen down but we shall rebuild with dressed stone; the sycamores have been felled 
but we shall replace them with cedars”. 

Isa 9:10 But, against them, Yahweh has raised their foe Razon, he has whipped up their enemies, 

Isa 9:11 Aram to the east, Philistines to the west, to devour Israel with gaping jaws. After all this, his anger is not 

spent. No, his hand is still raised! 

Isa 9:12 But the people would not come back to him who struck them, they would not seek out Yahweh 
Sabaoth; 

Isa 9:13 hence Yahweh has topped and tailed Israel, cutting off palm and reed in a single day. 

Isa 9:14 (The “top” is the elder and the man of rank; the “tail” is the prophet teaching lies.) 

Isa 9:15 This people’s leaders have led them astray, and those who are led by them are swallowed up. 

Isa 9:16 Hence the Lord will no longer take delight in their young people, or pity on their orphans and widows, 
since all of them are godless and evil, and everything they say is madness. After all this, his anger is not spent. 
No, his hand is still raised! 

Isa 9:17 Yes, wickedness has been burning like a fire, devouring bramble and thorn-bush, setting the forest 



thickets ablaze — up they go in billowing smoke! 

Isa 9:18 The country has been set on fire by the fury of Yahweh Sabaoth, and the people are like food for the 
flames. No one spares a thought for his brother. 

Isa 9:19 They have sliced to the right and are still hungry, they have eaten to the left and are not satisfied; each 
devours the flesh of his own arm. 

Isa 9:20 Manasseh devours Ephraim, Ephraim Manasseh, together they turn against Judah. After all this, his 
anger is not spent. No, his hand is still raised! 

Isa 10:1 Woe to those who enact unjust decrees, who compose oppressive legislation 

Isa 10:2 to deny justice to the weak and to cheat the humblest of my people of fair judgement, to make widows 
their prey and to rob the orphan. 

Isa 10:3 What will you do on the day of punishment, when disaster comes from far away? To whom will you run 
for help and where will you leave your riches, 

Isa 10:4 to avoid squatting among the captives or falling among the slain? After all this, his anger is not spent. 
No, his hand is still raised! 

Isa 10:5 Woe to Assyria, rod of my anger, the club in their hands is my fury! 

Isa 10:6 I was sending him against a godless nation, commissioning him against the people who enraged me, to 
pillage and plunder at will and trample on them like the mud in the streets. 

Isa 10:7 But this was not his intention nor did his heart plan it so, for he dreamed of putting an end to them, of 
liquidating nations without number! 

Isa 10:8 For he thought, “Are not my officers all kings? 

Isa 10:9 Is not Calno like Carchemish, Hamath like Arpad, Samaria like Damascus? 

Isa 10:10 As my hand has found the kingdoms of the false gods, where there were more images than in 
Jerusalem and Samaria, 

Isa 10:1 1 as I have treated Samaria and her false gods shall I not treat Jerusalem and her statues too?”. 

Isa 10:12 When the Lord has completed all his work on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, he will punish the fruit of 
the king of Assyria’s boastful heart and the insolence of his haughty looks. 

Isa 10:13 For he thinks: “By the strength of my own arm I have done this and by my own wisdom: how intelligent 
I have been! I have abolished the frontiers between peoples, I have plundered their treasures, like a hero, I have 
subjugated their inhabitants. 

Isa 10:14 My hand has found, as though a bird’s nest, the riches of the peoples. Like someöne collecting 
deserted eggs, I have collected the whole world while no one has fluttered a wing or opened a beak to squawk”. 
Isa 10:15 Does the axe claim more credit than the man who wields it, or the saw more strength than the man 
who handles it? As though a staff controlled those who raise it, or the club could raise what is not made of wood! 
Isa 10:16 That is why Yahweh Sabaoth is going to inflict leanness on his stout men, and beneath his glory 
kindle a fever burning like a fire. 

Isa 10:17 The light of Israel will become a fire and its Holy One a flame burning and devouring his thorn-bushes 
and brambles in a day. 

Isa 10:18 He will consume his luxuriant forest and productive ground, he will ravage body and soul: it will be like 
a consumptive wasting away; 

Isa 10:19 and what remain of the trees of his forest will be so few that a child could write their number. 

Isa 10:20 When that day comes, the remnant of Israel and the survivors of the House of Jacob will stop relying 
on the man who strikes them and will truly rely on Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel. 

Isa 10:21 A remnant will return, the remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God. 

Isa 10:22 Israel, though your people are like the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them will return: a 
destruction has been decreed which will make justice overflow, 

Isa 10:23 for, throughout the country, the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth will enforce the destruction now decreed. 

Isa 10:24 That is why the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth says this: My people who live in Zion, do not be afraid of 
Assyria! He may strike you with the rod, he may raise the club against you (on the way from Egypt), 

Isa 10:25 but in a very short time the retribution will come to an end, and my anger will destroy them. 

Isa 10:26 Yahweh Sabaoth will brandish a whip at him as he struck Midian at Oreb’s Rock, will brandish his rod 
at the Sea as he raised it on the way from Egypt. 

Isa 10:27 When that day comes, his burden will fall from your shoulder, and his yoke from your neck, and the 
yoke will be destroyed … 

Isa 10:28 He has reached Aiath, he has moved on to Migron, he has left his baggage train at Michmash. 

Isa 10:29 They have passed through the defile, they have bivouacked at Geba. Ramah quaked, Gibeah of Saul 
has fled. 

Isa 10:30 Cry your loudest, Bath-Gallim! Pay attention, Laish! Answer her, Anathoth! 

Isa 10:31 Madmenah has run away, the inhabitants of Gebim have taken cover. 

Isa 10:32 This very day, as he halts at Nob, he will shake his fist at the mountain of the daughter of Zion, the hill 



of Jerusalem. 

Isa 10:33 See how the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth violently lops off the foliage! The ones standing highest are cut 
down, the proudest are laid low! 

Isa 10:34 The forest thickets fall beneath the axe, and the Lebanon falls to the blows of a Mighty One. 

Isa 1 1 : 1 A shoot will spring from the stock of Jesse, a new shoot will grow from his roots. 

Isa 1 1 :2 On him will rest the spirit of Yahweh, the spirit of wisdom and insight, the spirit of counsel and power, 
the spirit of knowledge and fear of Yahweh: 

Isa 1 1 :3 his inspiration will lie in fearing Yahweh. His judgement will not be by appearances, his verdict not 
given on hearsay. 

Isa 1 1 :4 He will judge the weak with integrity and give fair sentence for the humblest in the land. He will strike 
the country with the rod of his mouth and with the breath of his lips bring death to the wicked. 

Isa 1 1 :5 Uprightness will be the belt around his waist, and constancy the belt about his hips. 

Isa 1 1 :6 The wolf will live with the lamb, the panther lie down with the kid, calf, lion and fat-stock beast together, 
with a little boy to lead them. 

Isa 1 1 :7 The cow and the bear will graze, their young will lie down together. The lion will eat hay like the ox. 

Isa 1 1 :8 The infant will play over the den of the adder; the baby will put his hand into the viper’s lair. 

Isa 11:9 No hurt, no harm will be done on all my holy mountain, for the country will be full of knowledge of 
Yahweh as the waters cover the sea. 

Isa 11:10 That day, the root of Jesse, standing as a signal for the peoples, will be sought out by the nations and 
its home will be glorious. 

Isa 11:11 When that day comes, the Lord will raise his hand a second time to ransom the remnant of his people, 
those still left, from Assyria, from Egypt, from Pathros, Cush and Elam, from Shinar, Hamath and the islands of 
the Sea. 

Isa 1 1:12 He will hoist a signal for the nations and assemble the outcasts of Israel; he will gather the scattered 
people of Judah from the four corners of the earth. 

Isa 11:13 Then Ephraim’s jealousy will cease and Judah’s enemies be suppressed; Ephraim will no longer be 
jealous of Judah nor Judah any longer hostile to Ephraim, 

Isa 11:14 but together they will swoop on the Philistines’ back, to the west, and together pillage the people of 
the east. Edom and Moab will be subject to their sway and the Ammonites will obey them. 

Isa 11:15 Then Yahweh will dry up the gulf of the Sea of Egypt, he will raise his hand against the River with the 
heat of his breath. He will divide it into seven streams for them to cross dry-shod. 

Isa 11:16 And there will be a highway for the remnant of his people for those still left, from Assyria, as there was 
for Israel when he came out of Egypt. 

Isa 12:1 And, that day, you will say: “I praise you, Yahweh, you have been angry with me but your anger is now 
appeased and you have comforted me. 

Isa 12:2 Look, he is the God of my salvation: I shall have faith and not be afraid, for Yahweh is my strength and 
my song, he has been my salvation”. 

Isa 12:3 Joyfully you will draw water from the springs of salvation 

Isa 12:4 and, that day, you will say, “Praise Yahweh, invoke his name. Proclaim his deeds to the people, declare 
his name sublime. 

Isa 12:5 Sing of Yahweh, for his works are majestic, make them known throughout the world. 

Isa 12:6 Cry and shout for joy, you who live in Zion, For the Holy One of Israel is among you in his greatness”. 
Isa 13:1 Proclamation about Babylon, seen by Isaiah son of Amoz. 

Isa 13:2 On a bare hill hoist a signal, shout for them, beckon them to come to the Nobles’ Gate. 

Isa 13:3 I have issued orders to my sacred warriors, I have summoned my heroes to serve my anger, my proud 
champions. 

Isa 1 3:4 The noise of a great crowd in the mountains, like an immense people, the tumultuous sound of 
kingdoms, of nations mustering: it is Yahweh Sabaoth marshalling the troops for battle. 

Isa 13:5 They come from a distant country, from the far horizons, Yahweh and the instruments of his fury to lay 
the whole country waste. 

Isa 13:6 Howl! For the Day of Yahweh is near, coming like devastation from Shaddai. 

Isa 13:7 This is why all hands fall limp, why all the men are losing heart; 

Isa 13:8 they are panic-stricken, seized with pains and convulsions; they writhe like a woman in labour, they 
look at one another appalled, with feverish faces. 

Isa 13:9 Look, the Day of Yahweh is coming, merciless, with wrath and burning anger, to reduce the country to 
a desert and root out the sinners from it. 

Isa 13:10 For in the sky the stars and Orion will shed their light no longer, the sun will be dark when it rises, and 
the moon will no longer give its light. 

Isa 13:1 1 I am going to punish the world for its wickedness and the wicked for their guilt, and put an end to the 



pride of the arrogant and humble the haughtiness of despots. 

Isa 13:12 I shall make people scarcer than pure gold, human life scarcer than the gold of Ophir. 

Isa 13:13 This is why I am going to shake the heavens, why the earth will reel on its foundations, under the 
wrath of Yahweh Sabaoth, the day when his anger ignites. 

Isa 13:14 Then like a hunted gazelle, like sheep that nobody gathers in, everyone will head back to his people, 
everyone will flee to his native land. 

Isa 13:15 All those who are found will be stabbed, all those captured will fall by the sword, 

Isa 13:16 their babies dashed to pieces before their eyes, their houses plundered, their wives raped. 

Isa 13:17 Look, against them I am stirring up the Medes who care nothing for silver, who set no value by gold. 
Isa 13:18 Bows will annihilate the young men, they will have no pity for the fruit of the womb, or mercy in their 
eyes for children. 

Isa 13:19 And Babylon, that pearl of kingdoms, that splendid jewel of the Chaldaeans, will, like Sodom and 
Gomorrah, be overthrown by God. 

Isa 13:20 Never again will anyone live there or reside there for all generations to come. Never again will the 
Arab pitch his tent there, or the shepherds bring their flocks to rest. 

Isa 13:21 But beasts of the desert will make their haunt there and owls fill their houses, there ostriches will settle 
their home, there goats will dance. 

Isa 13:22 Hyenas will howl in its towers, jackals in its delightful palaces, for its doom is about to come and its 
days will not last long. 

Isa 14:1 Yahweh will have pity on Jacob, he will choose Israel once more and resettle them on their native soil. 
Foreigners will join them, attaching themselves to the House of Jacob. 

Isa 14:2 Peoples will take them and escort them home, and the House of Israel will take them as slaves, men 
and women on Yahweh’s soil. They will enslave those who enslaved them and will master their oppressors. 

Isa 14:3 When that day comes, and Yahweh gives you rest from your suffering and torment and the grim 
servitude to which you have been subjected, 

Isa 14:4 you will recite this satire on the king of Babylon and say: “How did the tyrant end? How did his 
arrogance end? 

Isa 14:5 Yahweh has broken the staff of the wicked, the sceptre of rulers, 

Isa 14:6 furiously lashing peoples with continual blows, angrily hammering nations, pursuing without respite. 

Isa 14:7 The whole world is at rest and calm, shouts of joy resounding, 

Isa 14:8 the cypresses, the cedars of Lebanon, rejoice aloud at your fate, ‘Now that you have been laid low, no 
one comes up to fell us’. 

Isa 14:9 “On your account, Sheol below is astir to greet your arrival. He has roused the ghosts to greet you, all 
the rulers of the world. He has made all the kings of the nations get up from their thrones. 

Isa 14:10 They will all greet you with the words, ‘So, you too are now as weak as we are! You, too, have 
become like us. 

Isa 14:1 1 Your pride has been flung down to Sheol with the music of your lyres; under you a mattress of 
maggots, over you a blanket of worms. 

Isa 14:12 How did you come to fall from the heavens, Daystar, son of Dawn? How did you come to be thrown to 
the ground, conqueror of nations? 

Isa 14:13 You who used to think to yourself: I shall scale the heavens; higher than the stars of God I shall set 
my throne. I shall sit on the Mount of Assembly far away to the north. 

Isa 14:14 I shall climb high above the clouds, I shall rival the Most High’. 

Isa 14:15 Now you have been flung down to Sheol, into the depths of the abyss! 

Isa 14:16 “When they see you, they will scrutinise you and consider what you have become, ‘Is this the man 
who made the world tremble, who overthrew kingdoms? 

Isa 14:17 He made the world a desert, he levelled cities and never freed his prisoners to go home’. 

Isa 14:18 All other kings of nations, all of them, lie honourably, each in his own tomb; 

Isa 14:19 but you have been thrown away, unburied, like a loathsome branch, covered with heaps of the slain 
pierced by the sword who fall on the rocks of the abyss like trampled carrion. 

Isa 14:20 “You will not rejoin them in the grave, for you have brought your country to ruin and destroyed your 
people. The offspring of the wicked leave no name behind them. 

Isa 14:21 Make ready to slaughter his sons for the guilt of their father! Never again must they rise to conquer the 
world and cover the face of the earth with their cities. 

Isa 14:22 “I will rise against them, declares Yahweh Sabaoth, and deprive Babylon of name, remnant, offspring 
and posterity, declares Yahweh. 

Isa 14:23 I shall turn it into the haunt of hedgehogs, a swamp. I shall sweep it with the broom of destruction, 
declares Yahweh Sabaoth”. 

Isa 14:24 Yahweh Sabaoth has sworn it, “Yes, what I have planned will take place, what I have decided will be 



so: 

Isa 14:25 “I shall break Assyria in my country, I shall trample on him on my mountains. Then his yoke will slip off 
them, his burden will slip from their shoulders”. 

Isa 14:26 This is the decision taken in defiance of the whole world; this, the hand outstretched in defiance of all 
nations. 

Isa 14:27 Once Yahweh Sabaoth has decided, who will stop him? Once he stretches out his hand, who can 
withdraw it? 

Isa 14:28 In the year Ahaz died came this proclamation: 

Isa 14:29 All Philistia, do not rejoice because the rod which used to beat you is now broken, for the serpent 
stock will produce a viper, its offspring will be a flying dragon. 

Isa 14:30 While the first-born of the poor are grazing and the destitute are resting in safety, I shall make your 
stock die of hunger and then slaughter what remains of you. 

Isa 14:31 Howl, gate! Shriek, city! Totter, all Philistia! For a smoke is coming from the north, and there are no 
deserters in those battalions. 

Isa 14:32 What reply will be given then to the messengers of that nation? - That Yahweh founded Zion and 
there the poor of his people will find refuge. 

Isa 15:1 Proclamation about Moab: Laid waste in a night, Ar-Moab lies silent; Laid waste in a night, Kir-Moab 
lies silent. 

Isa 15:2 The daughter of Dibon has climbed to the high places to weep; on Nebo and in Medeba Moab laments. 
Every head shaven, every beard cut off, 

Isa 15:3 they wear sackcloth in their streets; on their roofs and in their squares, everyone is lamenting and 
collapsing in tears. 

Isa 15:4 Heshbon and Elealeh are crying out in distress, their voices can be heard as far as Jahaz. That is why 
the warriors of Moab are shivering, his soul trembles at the sound. 

Isa 15:5 His heart cries out in distress for Moab, whose fugitives are already at Zoar, nearly at Eglath- 
Shelishiyah. They climb the slope of Luhith, weeping as they go; on the road to Horonaim they utter heart- 
rending cries. 

Isa 15:6 The Waters of Nimrim have become a waste land, the grass dried up, the plants withered away, 
nothing green any more. 

Isa 1 5:7 That is why they are carrying what they could save of their stores across the Ravine of the Willows. 

Isa 1 5:8 For the cry for help re-echoes round the territory of Moab; their wailing, right to Eglaim, to Beer-Elim, 
their wailing; 

Isa 15:9 Dimon’s waters are swollen with blood, and I have worse in store for Dimon: a lion for those of Moab 
who survive, for those left on its soil. 

Isa 16:1 Send the lamb to the ruler of the land, from Sela by the desert, to the mountain of the daughter of Zion, 
Isa 16:2 for soon, like a fluttered bird, like nestlings cast out, will be the women of Moab at the fords of the 
Arnon. 

Isa 16:3 Hold a council, make a decision. At noon spread your shadow as if it were night. Hide those who have 
been driven out, do not betray the fugitive, 

Isa 16:4 let those who have been driven out of Moab come and live with you; be their refuge in the face of the 
devastator. Once the oppression is past, and the devastation has stopped and those now trampling on the 
country have gone away, 

Isa 16:5 the throne will be made secure in faithful love and on it will sit in constancy within the tent of David, a 
judge seeking fair judgement and pursuing uprightness. 

Isa 16:6 We have heard about Moab’s pride, about how very proud it is, about its arrogance, its pride, its rage, 
its bravado, which will come to nothing! 

Isa 16:7 And so Moab is wailing for Moab, wailing, every one of them. For the raisin cakes of Kir-Hareseth you 
mourn, stricken with grief. 

Isa 16:8 For Heshbon’s vineyards are withering, the vine of Sibmah whose red grapes used to overcome the 
overlords of the nations. It used to reach to Jazer, had wound its way into the desert, its shoots grew so 
numerous they spread across the sea. 

Isa 16:9 And so I weep, as Jazer weeps, for the vine of Sibmah. I water you with my tears, Heshbon and 
Elealeh. For over your harvest and vintage the cheering has died away; 

Isa 16:10 joy and gladness have vanished from the orchards. No more revelry in the vineyards, no more happy 
shouting; no more the treader treads wine in the presses, the cheering has ceased. 

Isa 16:1 1 That is why my whole being quivers like harp strings for Moab, my very heart, for Kir-Heres. 

Isa 16:12 Moab will be seen, wearing itself out on the high places and going to its temple to pray, but it will 
accomplish nothing. 

Isa 16:13 Such was the word which Yahweh spoke about Moab in the past. 



Isa 16:14 And now Yahweh has spoken in these terms, “Within three years, as a hired worker reckons them, the 
glory of Moab will be humbled, despite its teeming population. It will be reduced to nothing, an insignificant 
remnant”. 

Isa 17:1 Proclamation about Damascus: Damascus will soon cease to be a city, it will become a heap of ruins. 
Isa 17:2 Its towns, abandoned for ever, will be pastures for flocks; there they will rest with no one to disturb 
them. 

Isa 17:3 Ephraim will be stripped of its defences and Damascus of its sovereignty; and the remnant of Aram will 
be treated like the glory of the Israelites — declares Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Isa 17:4 When that day comes, Jacob’s glory will diminish, from being fat he will grow lean; 

Isa 17:5 as when a reaper gathers in the standing corn, harvesting the ears of corn with his arm, or when they 
glean the ears in the Valley of Rephaim, 

Isa 17:6 nothing will remain but pickings, as when an olive tree is beaten; two or three berries left on the 
topmost bough, four or five berries on the branches of the tree — declares Yahweh, God of Israel. 

Isa 17:7 That day, a man will look to his Creator and his eyes will turn to the Holy One of Israel. 

Isa 17:8 He will no longer look to altars, his own handiwork, or to what his own fingers have made: the sacred 
poles and incense-altars. 

Isa 17:9 That day, its cities of refuge will be abandoned as were the woods and heaths at the Israelites’ 
advance: there will be desolation. 

Isa 17:10 Since you have forgotten the God of your salvation, and failed to keep the Rock, your refuge, in mind, 
you plant pleasure-gardens, you sow exotic seeds; 

Isa 17:1 1 the day you plant them, you get them to sprout, and, next morning, your seedlings are in flower; but 
the harvest will vanish on the day of disease and incurable pain. 

Isa 17:12 Disaster! The thunder of vast hordes, a thunder like the thunder of the seas, the roar of nations 
roaring like the roar of mighty floods, 

Isa 17:13 of nations roaring like the roar of ocean! He rebukes them and far away they flee, driven like chaff on 
the mountains before the wind, like an eddy of dust before the storm. 

Isa 17:14 At evening all is terror, by morning all have disappeared. Such will be the lot of those who plunder us, 
such, the fate of our despoilers. 

Isa 18:1 Disaster! Land of the whirring locust beyond the rivers of Cush, 

Isa 18:2 who send ambassadors by sea, in little reed-boats across the waters! Go, swift messengers to a nation 
tall and bronzed, to a people feared far and near, a mighty and masterful nation whose country is criss-crossed 
with rivers. 

Isa 18:3 All you who inhabit the world, you who people the earth, when the signal is hoisted on the mountains, 
you will see, when the ram's-horn is sounded, you will hear. 

Isa 18:4 For this is what Yahweh has told me, “I shall sit here quietly looking down, like the burning heat in the 
daytime, like a dewy mist in the heat of harvest”. 

Isa 18:5 For, before the harvest, once the flowering is over and blossom turns into ripening grape, the branches 
will be cut off with pruning knives, and the shoots taken off, cut away. 

Isa 18:6 All has been abandoned to the mountain birds of prey and the wild animals: the birds of prey will 
summer on them, and all the wild animals winter on them. 

Isa 18:7 Then, an offering will be brought to Yahweh Sabaoth on behalf of a people tall and bronzed, on behalf 
of a people feared far and near, on behalf of a mighty and masterful nation whose country is criss-crossed with 
rivers: to the place where the name of Yahweh Sabaoth resides, Mount Zion. 

Isa 19:1 Proclamation about Egypt: Look! Yahweh, riding a swift cloud, is coming to Egypt. The false gods of 
Egypt totter before him and Egypt’s heart quails within her. 

Isa 19:2 I shall stir up Egypt against Egypt, they will fight one another, brother against brother, friend against 
friend, city against city, kingdom against kingdom. 

Isa 19:3 Egypt’s spirit will fail within her and I shall confound her deliberations. They will consult false gods and 
wizards, ghosts and sorcerers. 

Isa 19:4 And I shall hand Egypt over to the clutches of a cruel master, a ruthless king will rule them — declares 
Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Isa 19:5 The waters will ebb from the sea, the river will dry up and run low, 

Isa 19:6 the streams will become foul, the rivers of Egypt sink and dry up. Rush and reed will turn black, 

Isa 19:7 the Nile-plants on the banks of the Nile; all the vegetation of the Nile, will wither, blow away and be no 
more. 

Isa 19:8 The fishermen will groan, it will be mourning for all who cast hook in the Nile; those who spread nets on 
the waters will lose heart. 

Isa 19:9 The workers of carded flax and the weavers of white cloth will be confounded, 

Isa 19:10 the weavers dismayed, all the workmen dejected. 



Isa 19:1 1 Yes, the princes of Zoan are fools, Pharaoh’s wisest councillors make up a stupid council. How dare 
you say to Pharaoh, “I am descended from sages, I am descended from bygone kings'? 

Isa 19:12 Where are these sages of yours? Let them tell you, so that all may know, the plans Yahweh Sabaoth 
has made against Egypt! 

Isa 19:13 The princes of Zoan are fools, the princes of Noph, self-deceivers, the top men of her provinces have 
led Egypt astray. 

Isa 19:14 Yahweh has infused them with a giddy spirit; they have led Egypt astray in all she undertakes like a 
drunkard straying about as he vomits. 

Isa 19:15 Nowadays no one does for Egypt what top and tail, palm and reed used to do. 

Isa 19:16 That day Egypt will be like women, trembling and terrified at the threatening hand of Yahweh Sabaoth, 
when he raises it against her. 

Isa 19:17 The land of Judah will become Egypt’s shame; whenever she is reminded of it, she will be terrified, 
because of the plan which Yahweh Sabaoth has laid against her. 

Isa 19:18 That day in Egypt there will be five towns speaking the language of Canaan and pledging themselves 
to Yahweh Sabaoth; one of them will be called City of the Sun. 

Isa 19:19 That day there will be an altar dedicated to Yahweh in the centre of Egypt and, close to the frontier, a 
pillar dedicated to Yahweh, 

Isa 19:20 and this will be a sign and a witness to Yahweh Sabaoth in Egypt. When they cry to Yahweh for help 
because of oppressors, he will send them a Saviour and leader to deliver them. 

Isa 19:21 Yahweh will reveal himself to Egypt, and the Egyptians will acknowledge Yahweh that day and will 
offer sacrifices and cereal offerings, and will make vows to Yahweh and perform them. 

Isa 19:22 And if Yahweh strikes Egypt, having struck he will heal, and they will turn to Yahweh who will hear 
their prayers and heal them. 

Isa 19:23 That day there will be a highway from Egypt to Assyria. Assyria will have access to Egypt and Egypt 
have access to Assyria. Egypt will serve with Assyria. 

Isa 19:24 That day Israel will make a third with Egypt and Assyria, a blessing at the centre of the world, 

Isa 19:25 and Yahweh Sabaoth will bless them in the words, “Blessed be my people Egypt, Assyria my creation, 
and Israel my heritage”. 

Isa 20:1 The year the general-in-chief, sent by Sargon king of Assyria, came to Ashdod and stormed and 
captured it 

Isa 20:2 at that time Yahweh spoke through Isaiah son of Amoz and said, “Go, undo the sackcloth round your 
waist and take the sandals off your feet”. And he did so, and walked about, naked and barefoot. 

Isa 20:3 Yahweh then said, “As my servant Isaiah has been walking about naked and barefoot for the last three 
years as a sign and portent for Egypt and Cush, 

Isa 20:4 so the king of Assyria will lead the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Cush, young and old, naked and 
barefoot, their buttocks bared, to the shame of Egypt. 

Isa 20:5 Then they will be afraid and ashamed of Cush their hope and Egypt their pride, 

Isa 20:6 and the inhabitants of this coast will say on that day, ‘Look what has happened to our hope, to those to 
whom we fled for help, to escape from the king of Assyria. How are we going to escape?’”. 

Isa 21:1 Proclamation about the coastal desert: As whirlwinds sweeping over the Negeb, he comes from the 
desert, from a fearsome country. 

Isa 21:2 A harsh vision has been shown me, “The traitor betrays and the despoiler despoils. Advance, Elam, lay 
siege, Media!”. I have cut short all groaning. 

Isa 21 :3 This is why my loins are racked with pain, why I am seized with pangs like the pangs of a woman in 
labour; I am too distressed to hear, too afraid to look. 

Isa 21:4 My heart is bewildered, dread overwhelms me, the twilight I longed for has become my horror. 

Isa 21 :5 They lay the table, spread the cloth, they eat, they drink. Up, princes, grease the shield! 

Isa 21 :6 For this is what the Lord has told me, “Go, post a look-out, let him report what he sees. 

Isa 21:7 He will see cavalry, horsemen two by two, men mounted on donkeys, men mounted on camels; let him 
watch alertly, be very alert indeed!”. 

Isa 21:8 Then the look-out shouted, “On the watchtower, Lord, I stay all day and at my post I stand all night. 

Isa 21 :9 Now the cavalry is coming, horsemen two by two”. He shouted again and said, “Babylon has fallen, has 
fallen, and all the images of her gods he has shattered to the ground!”. 

Isa 21:10 You whom I have threshed, grain of my threshing-floor, what I have heard from Yahweh Sabaoth, God 
of Israel, I am telling you now. 

Isa 21:11 Proclamation about Dumah: From Seir, someöne shouts to me, “Watchman, what time of night? 
Watchman, what time of night?”. 

Isa 21:12 The watchman answers, “Morning is coming, then night again. If you want to ask, ask! Come back! 
Come here!”. 



Isa 21:13 Proclamation about the wastelands: In the thickets, on the wastelands, you spend the night, you 
caravans of Dedanites. 

Isa 21:14 Bring water for the thirsty! The inhabitants of Tema went with bread to greet the fugitive. 

Isa 21:15 For these have fled before the sword, the naked sword and the bent bow, the press of battle. 

Isa 21:16 For this is what the Lord has told me, “In one year’s time as a hired worker reckons it, all the glory of 
Kedar will be finished 

Isa 21:17 and, of the valiant archers, the Kedarites, hardly any will be left, for Yahweh, God of Israel, has 
spoken”. 

Isa 22:1 Prophecy on the Valley of Vision: Now what is the matter with you for you all to be up on the 
housetops, 

Isa 22:2 full of excitement, boisterous town, joyful city? Your slain have not fallen to the sword nor died in battle. 
Isa 22:3 Your leaders have all fled together, captured without a bow between them, all who could be found have 
been captured at a blow, far though they had fled. 

Isa 22:4 That is why I said, “Turn your eyes away from me, let me weep bitterly; do not try to comfort me over 
the ruin of the daughter of my people”. 

Isa 22:5 For this is a day of rout, panic and confusion, the work of the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth in the Valley of 
Vision. The wall is sapped, cries for help ring out to the mountains. 

Isa 22:6 Elam has picked up his quiver, with manned chariots and horsemen, and Kir has bared his shield. 

Isa 22:7 Your fairest valleys are full of chariots and the horsemen take up positions at the gates; 

Isa 22:8 thus falls the defence of Judah. That day you turned your gaze to the weapons in the House of the 
Forest. 

Isa 22:9 You saw how many breaches there were in the City of David. You collected the waters of the lower 
pool. 

Isa 22:10 You surveyed the houses in Jerusalem and pulled houses down to strengthen the wall. 

Isa 22:1 1 Between the two walls you made a reservoir for the waters of the old pool. But you did not look to the 
Creator of these things, you did not look to the One who fashioned them long ago. 

Isa 22:12 That day the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth called on you to weep and mourn, to shave your heads, to put on 
sackcloth. 

Isa 22:13 But instead there is joy and merriment, killing of oxen, slaughtering of sheep, eating of meat, drinking 
of wine, “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall be dead”. 

Isa 22:14 Then Yahweh Sabaoth revealed this to my ears, “This guilt will never be forgiven you, until you are 
dead”, says the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Isa 22:15 The Lord Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Go and find that steward, Shebna, the master of the palace: 

Isa 22:16 “What do you own here, who gave you the right for you to hew yourself a tomb here?”. He is hewing 
himself a tomb, is digging a resting-place for himself in the rock. 

Isa 22:17 But Yahweh will throw you away, strong as you are, will grasp you in his grip, 

Isa 22:18 will screw you up into a ball, a ball thrown into a vast space. There you will die, with your splendid 
chariots, disgrace to your master’s palace! 

Isa 22:19 I shall hound you from your office, I shall snatch you from your post 

Isa 22:20 and, when that day comes, I shall summon my servant Eliakim son of Hilkiah. 

Isa 22:21 I shall dress him in your tunic, I shall put your sash round his waist, I shall invest him with your 
authority; and he will be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the House of Judah. 

Isa 22:22 I shall place the key of David’s palace on his shoulder; when he opens, no one will close, when he 
closes, no one will open. 

Isa 22:23 I shall drive him like a nail into a firm place; and he will become a throne of glory for his family. 

Isa 22:24 “On him will depend all the glory of his family, the descendants and offspring, all the vessels of small 
capacity too, from cups to pitchers. 

Isa 22:25 That day, declares Yahweh Sabaoth, the nail driven into a firm place will give way, will be torn out and 
fall. And the whole load hanging on it will be lost. For Yahweh has spoken”. 

Isa 23:1 Proclamation about Tyre: Howl, ships of Tarshish, for all has been destroyed- no more houses, no way 
of getting in: the news has reached them from Kittim. 

Isa 23:2 Be struck dumb, inhabitants of the coast, you merchants of Sidon, whose messengers cross the sea 
Isa 23:3 to the wide ocean. The grain of the Canal, the harvest of the Nile, formed her revenue. She was the 
market for the nations. 

Isa 23:4 Blush, Sidon (citadel of the seas), for this is what the sea has said, “I have felt no birth-pangs, never 
given birth, never reared boys nor brought up girls”. 

Isa 23:5 When the news reaches Egypt, they will tremble to hear Tyre’s fate. 

Isa 23:6 Cross to Tarshish, howl, inhabitants of the coast. 

Isa 23:7 Is this your proud city founded far back in the past, whose steps led her far afield to found her colonies? 



Isa 23:8 Who took this decision against Tyre, who used to hand out crowns, whose traders were princes, whose 
merchants, men honoured in the city? 

Isa 23:9 Yahweh Sabaoth took this decision to wither the pride of all beauty and humiliate those honoured in the 
city. 

Isa 23:10 Cultivate your country like the Delta, daughter of Tarshish, for your marine docks are no more. 

Isa 23:1 1 He has raised his hand against the sea, he has shaken kingdoms, Yahweh has ordained the 
destruction of the fortresses of Canaan. 

Isa 23:12 He has said, “Exult no more, ill-treated virgin daughter of Sidon! Get up, cross to Kittim, no respite for 
you there, either”. 

Isa 23:13 Look at the land of the Chaldaeans, a people who used not to exist! Assyria assigned it to the 
creatures of the wilds; they raised their siege-towers against it, demolished its bastions, reduced it to ruin. 

Isa 23:14 Howl, ships of Tarshish, for your fortress has been destroyed. 

Isa 23:15 When that day comes, Tyre will be forgotten for seventy years, the length of one king’s life. But when 
the seventy years are over, Tyre will become like the whore in the song: 

Isa 23:16 “Take your harp, walk the town, whore whom men have forgotten! Play sweetly, song after song, to 
make them remember you”. 

Isa 23:17 At the end of the seventy years Yahweh will visit Tyre. She will receive her pay again and play the 
whore with all the kingdoms of the world on the surface of the earth. 

Isa 23:18 But her profits and wages will be dedicated to Yahweh. They will not be stored or hoarded, but her 
profits will go to those who live in Yahweh’s presence, for them to have as much food as they want and splendid 
clothes. 

Isa 24:1 See how Yahweh lays the earth waste, makes it a desert, buckles its surface, scatters its inhabitants, 
Isa 24:2 priest and people alike, master and slave, mistress and maid, seller and buyer, lender and borrower, 
creditor and debtor. 

Isa 24:3 Ravaged, ravaged the earth will be, despoiled, despoiled, for Yahweh has uttered this word. 

Isa 24:4 The earth is mourning, pining away, the pick of earth’s people are withering away. 

Isa 24:5 The earth is defiled by the feet of its inhabitants, for they have transgressed the laws, violated the 
decree, broken the everlasting covenant. 

Isa 24:6 That is why the curse has consumed the earth and its inhabitants pay the penalty, that is why the 
inhabitants of the earth have been burnt up and few people are left. 

Isa 24:7 The new wine is mourning, the vine is withering away, the once merry-hearted are sighing. 

Isa 24:8 The cheerful sound of tambourines is silent, the sound of revelling is over, the cheerful sound of the 
harp is silent. 

Isa 24:9 No more will they sing over their wine, liquor will taste bitter to the drinker. 

Isa 24:10 The city of nothingness is in ruins, every house is shut, no one can enter. 

Isa 24:1 1 People shout in the streets to try to get wine; all joy has vanished, happiness has been banished from 
the country. 

Isa 24:12 Nothing but rubble in the city, the gate has collapsed in ruins. 

Isa 24:13 For at the heart of earth’s life, among the peoples, it is as at the beating of the olive trees, as at the 
gleaning of the grapes when the grape harvest is over. 

Isa 24:14 They raise their voices, shouting for joy, in Yahweh’s honour they shout from the west. 

Isa 24:15 “Yes, in the east, give glory to Yahweh, in the islands of the sea, to the name of Yahweh, God of 
Israel!”. 

Isa 24:16 We have heard psalms from the remotest parts of earth, “Glory to the Upright One!”. But I thought, 
“What an ordeal, what an ordeal! What misery for me!”. The traitors have betrayed, the traitors have acted most 
treacherously. 

Isa 24:17 Fear, the pit and the snare for you, inhabitants of the city! 

Isa 24:18 And whoëver flees from the cry of fear will fall into the pit, and whoëver climbs out of the pit will be 
caught in the snare. Yes, the sluice-gates above are open, the foundations of the earth are quaking. 

Isa 24:19 A cracking, the earth cracks open, a jolting, the earth gives a jolt, a lurching, the earth lurches 
backwards and forwards. 

Isa 24:20 The earth will reel to and fro like a drunkard, it will be shaken like a shanty; so heavy will be its sin on 
it, it will fall, never to rise again. 

Isa 24:21 When that day comes, Yahweh will punish the armies of the sky above and on earth the kings of the 
earth; 

Isa 24:22 they will be herded together, herded together like prisoners in a dungeon and shut up in gaol, and, 
after long years, punished. 

Isa 24:23 The moon will be confused and the sun ashamed, for Yahweh Sabaoth is king on Mount Zion and in 
Jerusalem, and the Glory will radiate on their elders. 



Isa 25:1 Yahweh, you are my God, I shall praise you to the heights, I shall praise your name; for you have 
accomplished marvels, plans long-conceived, faithfully, firmly. 

Isa 25:2 For you have made the town a heap of stones, the fortified city a ruin. The foreigners’ citadel is a city 
no longer, it will never be rebuilt. 

Isa 25:3 Hence mighty peoples will honour you, the city of pitiless nations hold you in awe; 

Isa 25:4 For you have been a refuge for the weak, a refuge for the needy in distress, a shelter from the storm, 
shade from the heat; for the breath of the pitiless is like a winter storm. 

Isa 25:5 Like heat in a dry land you calm the foreigners’ tumult; as heat under the shadow of a cloud, so the 
song of the pitiless dies away. 

Isa 25:6 On this mountain, for all peoples, Yahweh Sabaoth is preparing a banquet of rich food, a banquet of 
fine wines, of succulent food, of well-strained wines. 

Isa 25:7 On this mountain, he has destroyed the veil which used to veil all peoples, the pall enveloping all 
nations; 

Isa 25:8 he has destroyed death for ever. Lord Yahweh has wiped away the tears from every cheek; he has 
taken his people’s shame away everywhere on earth, for Yahweh has spoken. 

Isa 25:9 And on that day, it will be said, “Look, this is our God, in him we put our hope that he should save us, 
this is Yahweh, we put our hope in him. Let us exult and rejoice since he has saved us”. 

Isa 25:10 For Yahweh’s hand will rest on this mountain, and Moab will be trodden under his feet as straw is 
trodden into the dung-heap. 

Isa 25:1 1 He may stretch his hands wide on the mountain like a swimmer stretching out his hands to swim. But 
he will humble his pride despite what his hands may attempt. 

Isa 25:12 And the impregnable fortress of your walls, he has overthrown, laid low, flung to the ground, in the 
dust. 

Isa 26:1 That day, this song will be sung in Judah: “We have a fortress city, the walls and ramparts provide 
safety. 

Isa 26:2 Open the gates! Let the upright nation come in, the nation that keeps faith! 

Isa 26:3 This is the plan decreed: you will guarantee peace, the peace entrusted to you. 

Isa 26:4 Trust in Yahweh for ever, for Yahweh is a rock for ever. 

Isa 26:5 He has brought low the dwellers on the heights, the lofty citadel; he lays it low, brings it to the ground, 
flings it down in the dust. 

Isa 26:6 It will be trodden under foot, by the feet of the needy, the steps of the weak”. 

Isa 26:7 The path of the Upright One is honesty; you smooth the honest way of the upright. 

Isa 26:8 Following the path of your judgements, Yahweh, we set our hopes in you, your name, your memory are 
all our soul desires. 

Isa 26:9 At night my soul longs for you and my spirit within me seeks you out; for when your judgements appear 
on earth the inhabitants of the world learn what saving justice is. 

Isa 26:10 If pity is shown to the wicked without his learning what saving justice is, he will act wrongly in the land 
of right conduct and not see the majesty of Yahweh. 

Isa 26:1 1 Yahweh, your hand is raised but they do not see! The antagonists of your people will look and grow 
pale; with your fiery wrath you will devour your enemies. 

Isa 26:12 Yahweh, you will grant us peace, having completed all our undertakings for us. 

Isa 26:13 Yahweh our God, other lords than you have ruled us but, loyal to you alone, we invoke your name. 

Isa 26:14 The dead will not come back to life, the shadows will not rise again, for you have punished them, 
annihilated them, wiping out their very memory. 

Isa 26:15 You have made the nation larger, Yahweh, made the nation larger and won yourself glory, you have 
rolled back the frontiers of the country. 

Isa 26:16 Yahweh, in distress they had recourse to you, they expended themselves in prayer, since your 
punishment was on them. 

Isa 26:17 As a pregnant woman near her time of delivery writhes and cries out in her pangs, so have we been, 
Yahweh, in your eyes: 

Isa 26:18 we have been pregnant, we have writhed, but we have given birth only to wind: we have not given 
salvation to the earth, no inhabitants for the world have been brought to birth. 

Isa 26:19 Your dead will come back to life, your corpses will rise again. Wake up and sing, you dwellers in the 
dust, for your dew will be a radiant dew, but the earth will give birth to the shades. 

Isa 26:20 Go, my people, go to your private room, shut yourselves in. Hide yourselves a little while until the 
retribution has passed. 

Isa 26:21 For see, Yahweh emerges from his dwelling to punish the inhabitants of earth for their guilt; and the 
earth will reveal the blood shed on it and no longer hide its slain. 

Isa 27:1 That day Yahweh will punish, with his unyielding sword, massive and strong, Leviathan the fleeing 



serpent, Leviathan the coiling serpent; he will kill that dragon that lives in the sea. 

Isa 27:2 That day, sing of the splendid vineyard! 

Isa 27:3 I, Yahweh, am its guardian, from time to time I water it; so that no harm befall it, I guard it night and 
day. 

Isa 27:4 -I do not have a wall. Who can reduce me to brambles and thorn-bushes? -I shall make war and 
trample on it and at the same time burn it. 

Isa 27:5 Or should they beg for my protection, let them make their peace with me, peace let them make with 
me. 

Isa 27:6 In days to come, Jacob will take root, Israel will bud and blossom and the surface of the world be one 
vast harvest. 

Isa 27:7 Has he struck him as he was struck by those who struck him? Has he murdered him as he was 
murdered by those who murdered him? 

Isa 27:8 By expelling, by excluding him, you have executed a sentence, he has blown him away with a breath 
as rough as the east wind. 

Isa 27:9 For that is how Jacob’s guilt will be forgiven, such will be the result of renouncing his sin, when all the 
altar-stones have been smashed to pieces like lumps of chalk, when the sacred poles and incense-altars stand 
no longer. 

Isa 27:10 For the fortified city is abandoned now, deserted, forsaken as a desert where calves browse, where 
they lie down, destroying its branches. 

Isa 27:1 1 When boughs go dry, they get burnt, women come and use them for firewood. Now, this is a people 
that does not understand, and so its Maker will not take pity on it, he who formed it will not show it any mercy. 

Isa 27:12 When that day comes, Yahweh will start his threshing from the course of the River to the Torrent of 
Egypt, and you will be gathered one by one, Israelites! 

Isa 27:13 When that day comes, the great ram's-horn will be sounded, and those lost in Assyria will come, and 
those banished to Egypt, and they will worship Yahweh on the holy mountain, in Jerusalem. 

Isa 28:1 Woe to the haughty crown of Ephraim’s drunkards, to the fading flower of its proud splendour sited at 
the head of the lush valley, to those prostrated by wine! 

Isa 28:2 See, a strong and mighty man in the Lord’s service, like a storm of hail, a destroying tempest, like 
immense flood-waters overflowing, with his hand he throws them to the ground. 

Isa 28:3 They will be trampled underfoot, the haughty crown of Ephraim’s drunkards, 

Isa 28:4 and the faded flower of its proud splendour sited at the head of the lush valley. Like a fig ripe before 
summer comes: whoëver spots it forthwith picks and swallows it. 

Isa 28:5 That day Yahweh Sabaoth will be a crown of splendour and a proud diadem for the remnant of his 
people, 

Isa 28:6 a spirit of fair judgement for him who sits in judgement, and the strength of those who repel the assault 
on the gate. 

Isa 28:7 These too have been confused by wine, have gone astray owing to liquor. Priest and prophet have 
become confused by liquor, are sodden with wine, have strayed owing to liquor, have become confused in their 
visions, have strayed in their decisions. 

Isa 28:8 Yes, every table is covered in filthy vomit, not one is clean! 

Isa 28:9 “Whom does he think he is lecturing? Whom does he think his message is for? Babies just weaned? 
Babies just taken from the breast? 

Isa 28:10 With his ‘Sav lasav, sav lasav, kav lakav, kav lakav, zeer sham, zeer sham!’. 

Isa 28:1 1 Now, with stammering lips and in a foreign language, he will talk to this nation. 

Isa 28:12 He used to say to them, “Here you can rest! Here you can let the weary rest! Here all is quiet”. But they 
refused to listen. 

Isa 28:13 Now Yahweh is going to say this to them, “Sav lasav, sav lasav, kav lakav, kav lakav, zeer sham, zeer 
sham”. So that when they walk they will fall over backwards and so be broken, trapped and taken captive. 

Isa 28:14 Hence listen to Yahweh’s word, you insolent men, rulers of this people in Jerusalem. 

Isa 28:15 Because you have said, “We have made a treaty with Death and have struck a pact with Sheol. When 
the scourging flood comes over, it will not touch us, for we have made lies our refuge and hidden under 
falsehood”. 

Isa 28:16 So the Lord Yahweh says this, “Now I shall lay a stone in Zion, a granite stone, a precious corner- 
stone, a firm foundation-stone: no one who relies on this will stumble. 

Isa 28:17 And I will make fair judgement the measure, and uprightness the plumb-line”. But hail will sweep away 
the refuge of lies and floods wash away the hiding-place; 

Isa 28:18 your treaty with Death will be broken and your pact with Sheol will not hold. When the scourging flood 
comes over, you will be trodden down by it; 

Isa 28:19 every time it comes over, it will seize on you, for it will come over, morning after morning, day by day 



and night by night. Nothing but fear will make you understand what you hear. 

Isa 28:20 For the bed is too short to stretch in, the blanket too narrow for covering. 

Isa 28:21 Yes, as on Mount Perazim, Yahweh will rise, as in the Valley of Gibeon, he will storm to do his work, 

his mysterious work, to do his deed, his extraordinary deed. 

Isa 28:22 Stop scoffing, then, or your bonds will be tightened further, for I have heard it: it has been irrevocably 
decided as regards the whole country by the Lord Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Isa 28:23 Listen closely to my words, be attentive, understand what I am saying. 

Isa 28:24 Does the ploughman plough all day to sow, breaking up and harrowing his ground? 

Isa 28:25 Once he has levelled its surface, does he not scatter fennel, sow cummin? Then he puts in wheat, 

millet, barley and, round the edges, spelt, 

Isa 28:26 for his God has taught him this rule and instructed him. 

Isa 28:27 Fennel must not be crushed with a sledge, nor cart-wheels driven over cummin; fennel must be 
beaten with a stick, and cummin with a flail. 

Isa 28:28 When you are threshing wheat, you do not waste time crushing it; you get the horse and cart-wheel 
moving, but you do not grind it fine. 

Isa 28:29 All this is a gift from Yahweh Sabaoth, marvellous advice leading to great achievements. 

Isa 29:1 Woe, Ariel, Ariel, city where David encamped. Let year after year pass, let the feasts make their full 
round, 

Isa 29:2 then I shall inflict trouble on Ariel, and there will be sighing and sobbing, and I shall make it truly Ariel. 
Isa 29:3 I shall encamp all round you, I shall lay siege to you and mount siege-works against you. 

Isa 29:4 You will be laid low, will speak from the underworld, your words will rise like a murmur from the dust. 
Your voice from the earth will be like a ghost’s, it will whisper as though coming from the dust. 

Isa 29:5 The horde of your enemies will be like fine dust, the horde of the warriors like flying chaff. And 
suddenly, in an instant, 

Isa 29:6 you will be visited by Yahweh Sabaoth with thunder, earthquake, mighty din, hurricane, tempest, flame 
of devouring fire. 

Isa 29:7 It will be like a dream, like a vision at night: the horde of all the nations at war with Ariel, all those 
fighting, besieging and troubling it. 

Isa 29:8 It will be like the dream of a hungry man: he eats, then wakes up with an empty belly; or like the dream 
of a thirsty man: he drinks, then wakes up exhausted with a parched throat. So will it be with the horde of all the 
nations making war on Mount Zion. 

Isa 29:9 Be stupefied and stunned, go blind, unseeing, drunk but not on wine, staggering but not through liquor. 
Isa 29:10 For Yahweh has infused you with a spirit of lethargy, he has closed your eyes (the prophets), he has 
veiled your heads (the seers). 

Isa 29:1 1 For to you every vision has become like the words of a sealed book. You give it to someöne able to 
read and say, “Read that”. He replies, “I cannot, because it is sealed”. 

Isa 29:12 You then give the book to someöne who cannot read, and say, “Read that”. He replies, “I cannot read”. 
Isa 29:13 The Lord then said: Because this people approaches me only in words, honours me only with lip- 
service while their hearts are far from me, and reverence for me, as far as they are concerned, is nothing but 
human commandment, a lesson memorised, 

Isa 29:14 very well, I shall have to go on astounding this people with prodigies and wonders: for the wisdom of 
its wise men is doomed, the understanding of any who understand will vanish. 

Isa 29:15 Woe to those who burrow down to conceal their plans from Yahweh, who scheme in the dark and say, 
“Who can see us? Who knows who we are?”. 

Isa 29:16 How perverse you are! Is the potter no better than the clay? Something that was made, can it say of 
its maker, “He did not make me'? Or a pot say of the potter, “He does not know his job'? 

Isa 29:17 Is it not true that in a very short time the Lebanon will become productive ground, so productive you 
might take it for a forest? 

Isa 29:18 That day the deaf will hear the words of the book and, delivered from shadow and darkness, the eyes 
of the blind will see. 

Isa 29:19 The lowly will find ever more joy in Yahweh and the poorest of people will delight in the Holy One of 
Israel; 

Isa 29:20 for the tyrant will be no more, the scoffer has vanished and all those on the look-out for evil have been 
destroyed: 

Isa 29:21 those who incriminate others by their words, those who lay traps for the arbitrator at the gate and 
groundlessly deprive the upright of fair judgement. 

Isa 29:22 That is why Yahweh, God of the House of Jacob, Abraham’s redeemer, says this, “No longer shall 
Jacob be disappointed, no more shall his face grow pale, 

Isa 29:23 for when he sees his children, my creatures, home again with him, he will acknowledge my name as 



holy, he will acknowledge the Holy One of Jacob to be holy and will hold the God of Israel in awe. 

Isa 29:24 Erring spirits will learn to understand and murmurers accept instruction”. 

Isa 30:1 Woe to the rebellious children — declares Yahweh — who make plans which do not come from me and 
make alliances not inspired by me, and so add sin to sin! 

Isa 30:2 They are leaving for Egypt, without consulting me, to take refuge in Pharaoh’s protection, to shelter in 
Egypt’s shadow. 

Isa 30:3 Pharaoh’s protection will be your shame, the shelter of Egypt’s shadow your confounding. 

Isa 30:4 For his princes have gone to Zoan and his messengers have reached Hanes. 

Isa 30:5 Everyone has been disappointed by a people who cannot help, who bring neither aid nor profit, only 
disappointment and confusion. 

Isa 30:6 Proclamation about the beasts of the Negeb: Into the land of distress and of anguish, of lioness and 
roaring lion, of viper and flying dragon, they bear their riches on donkeys’ backs, their treasures on camels’ 
humps, to a nation that cannot help: 

Isa 30:7 Egypt, whose help is vain and futile; and so I call her ‘Rahab -the-collapsed’. 

Isa 30:8 Now go, inscribe this on a tablet, write it on a scroll, so that it may serve for time to come for ever and 
for ever. 

Isa 30:9 This is a rebellious people, they are lying children, children who will not listen to Yahweh’s Law. 

Isa 30:10 To the seers they say, “See nothing!”. To the prophets, “Do not prophesy the truth to us; tell us flattering 
things; have illusory visions; 

Isa 30:1 1 turn aside from the way, leave the path, rid us of the Holy One of Israel”. 

Isa 30:12 So the Holy One of Israel says this, “Since you have rejected this word and put your trust in fraud and 
disloyalty and rely on these, 

Isa 30:13 for you this guilt will prove to be a breach opening up, a bulge at the top of a wall which suddenly and 
all at once comes crashing down. 

Isa 30:14 He will shatter it like an earthenware pot, ruthlessly knocking it to pieces, so that of the fragments not 
one shard can be found with which to take up fire from the hearth or scoop water from the storage-well”. 

Isa 30:15 For Lord Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel, says this, “Your salvation lay in conversion and tranquillity, 
your strength in serenity and trust and you would have none of it. 

Isa 30:16 ‘No’, you said, ‘we shall flee on horses’. And so flee you will! And again, ‘We shall ride on swift 
ones’. And so your pursuers will be swift! 

Isa 30:17 A thousand will quake at the threat of one and when five threaten you will flee, until what is left of you 
will be like a flagstaff on a mountain top, like a signal on a hill”. 

Isa 30:18 But Yahweh is waiting to be gracious to you, the Exalted One, to take pity on you, for Yahweh is a 
God of fair judgement; blessed are all who hope in him. 

Isa 30:19 Yes, people of Zion living in Jerusalem, you will weep no more. He will be gracious to you when your 
cry for help rings out; as soon as he hears it, he will answer you. 

Isa 30:20 When the Lord has given you the bread of suffering and the water of distress, he who is your teacher 
will hide no longer, and you will see your teacher with your own eyes. 

Isa 30:21 Your ears will hear these words behind you, “This is the way, keep to it”, whether you turn to right or 
left. 

Isa 30:22 You will hold unclean the silverplating of your idols and the goldplating of your images. You will throw 
them away like the polluted things they are, shouting after them, “Good riddance!”. 

Isa 30:23 He will send rain for the seed you sow in the ground, and the bread that the ground provides will be 
rich and nourishing. That day, your cattle will graze in wide pastures. 

Isa 30:24 Oxen and donkeys that work the land will eat for fodder wild sorrel, spread by the shovel-load and 
fork-load. 

Isa 30:25 On every lofty mountain, on every high hill there will be streams and water-courses, on the day of the 
great slaughter when the strongholds fall. 

Isa 30:26 Then moonlight will be bright as sunlight and sunlight itself be seven times brighter — like the light of 
seven days in one — on the day Yahweh dresses his people’s wound and heals the scars of the blows they have 
received. 

Isa 30:27 See, the name of Yahweh comes from afar, blazing his anger, heavy his threat. His lips are brimming 
over with fury, his tongue is like a devouring fire. 

Isa 30:28 His breath is like a river in spate coming up to the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of 
destruction, to harness the peoples in a bridle, that will lead them astray. 

Isa 30:29 Your song will be like that on a festal night, and there will be joy in your hearts as when to the sound 
of the flute people make a pilgrimage to the mountain of Yahweh, the Rock of Israel. 

Isa 30:30 Yahweh will make his majestic voice ring out, he will show the weight of his arm in the heat of his 
anger, with a devouring fire, with thunderbolt, downpour and hailstones. 



Isa 30:31 Yes, at Yahweh’s voice Assyria will be terrified, he will strike him with his rod; 

Isa 30:32 each time he goes by, will fall the punishing rod that Yahweh will lay on him, to the sound of 
tambourines and harps, in the battles which he will wage against him with uplifted hand. 

Isa 30:33 Yes, Topheth has been ready for a long time now, that too is ready for the king, deep and wide his 
pyre, fire and wood in plenty. Yahweh’s breath, like a stream of brimstone, will set fire to it. 

Isa 31:1 Woe to those going down to Egypt for help, who put their trust in horses, who rely on the quantity of 
chariots, and on great strength of cavalrymen, but do not look to the Holy One of Israel or consult Yahweh. 

Isa 31 :2 Yet he too is wise and can bring disaster and he will not go back on his word; he will rise against the 
breed of evil-doers and against those who protect wrong-doers. 

Isa 31:3 The Egyptian is human, not divine, his horses are flesh, not spirit; Yahweh will stretch out his hand: the 
protector will stumble, the protected will fall and all will perish together. 

Isa 31 :4 Yes, this is what Yahweh has said to me: As a lion or lion cub growls over its prey, when scores of 
shepherds are summoned to drive it off, without being frightened by their shouting or cowed by the noise they 
make, just so will Yahweh Sabaoth descend to fight for Mount Zion and for its hill. 

Isa 31:5 Like hovering birds, so will Yahweh Sabaoth protect Jerusalem; by protecting it, he will save it, by 
supporting it, he will deliver it. 

Isa 31 :6 Come back to the one whom the Israelites have so deeply betrayed! 

Isa 31 :7 For, that day, each of you will throw away the false gods of silver and the false gods of gold which your 
own sinful hands have made. 

Isa 31 :8 Assyria will fall by the sword, not that of a man, will be devoured by the sword, of no human being, he 
will flee before the sword and his young warriors will be enslaved. 

Isa 31:9 In his terror he will abandon his rock, and his panic-stricken officers desert the standard — declares 
Yahweh, whose fire is in Zion, whose furnace, in Jerusalem. 

Isa 32:1 There will be a king who reigns uprightly and princes who rule with fair judgement; 

Isa 32:2 each will be like a shelter from the wind, a refuge from the storm, like streams on arid ground, like the 
shade of a solid rock in a desolate land. 

Isa 32:3 The eyes of seers will no longer be closed, the ears of hearers will be alert, 

Isa 32:4 the heart of the hasty will learn to think things over, and the tongue of stammerers will speak promptly 
and clearly. 

Isa 32:5 The fool will no longer be called generous, nor the rascal be styled bountiful. 

Isa 32:6 For the fool speaks folly and his heart is set on villainy; he is godless in his actions and his words 
ascribe error to Yahweh; he starves the hungry of their food and refuses drink to the thirsty. 

Isa 32:7 Everything to do with the rascal is evil, he devises infamous plans to ruin the poor with lying words 
even when the needy has right on his side; 

Isa 32:8 but the noble person plans only noble things, noble his every move. 

Isa 32:9 Stand up, you haughty women, listen to my words; you over-confident daughters, pay attention to what 
I say. 

Isa 32:10 Within one year and a few days you will tremble, you over-confident women; grape-harvesting will be 
finished, gathering will never happen again. 

Isa 32:1 1 Shudder, you haughty women, tremble, you over-confident women; strip, undress, put sackcloth 
round your waists. 

Isa 32:12 Beat your breasts for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine, 

Isa 32:13 for my people’s soil where the bramble-bush will be growing and for all the happy houses, for the 
rejoicing city. 

Isa 32:14 For the citadel will be abandoned and the thronged city deserted, Ophel and the Keep will be denuded 
for ever, the playground of wild donkeys and the pasture of flocks, 

Isa 32:15 until the spirit is poured out on us from above, and the desert becomes an orchard, and an orchard 
that seems like a forest. 

Isa 32:16 Fair judgement will fix its home in the desert, and uprightness live in this orchard, 

Isa 32:17 and the product of uprightness will be peace, the effect of uprightness being quiet and security for 
ever. 

Isa 32:18 My people will live in a peaceful home, in peaceful houses, tranquil dwellings. 

Isa 32:19 And should the forest be totally destroyed and the city gravely humiliated, 

Isa 32:20 You will be happy to sow wherever there is water and to let the ox and donkey roam free. 

Isa 33:1 Woe to you, destroying though not yourself destroyed, betraying though not yourself betrayed; when 
you have finished destroying, you will be destroyed, when you have stopped betraying, you will be betrayed. 

Isa 33:2 Yahweh, show us your mercy, we hope in you. Be our arm every morning and our salvation in time of 
distress. 

Isa 33:3 At the sound of tumult the peoples flee, when you stand up the nations scatter. 



Isa 33:4 Your spoil is gathered in as a grasshopper gathers in, like a swarm of locusts people descend on it. 

Isa 33:5 Yahweh is exalted, for he is enthroned above, he has filled Zion with fair judgement and saving justice. 
Isa 33:6 You can count on this all your days: wisdom and knowledge are the riches that save, the fear of 
Yahweh is his treasure. 

Isa 33:7 Look, Ariel is lamenting in the streets, the ambassadors of peace are weeping bitterly. 

Isa 33:8 The highways are deserted, no travellers any more on the roads. Agreements are broken, witnesses 
held in contempt, there is respect for no one. 

Isa 33:9 The land pines away in mourning, the Lebanon is withering with shame, Sharon has become like the 
wasteland, Bashan and Carmel are shuddering. 

Isa 33:10 “Now I shall stand up”, says Yahweh, “now I shall rise, now draw myself up. 

Isa 33:1 1 You conceive chaff, you give birth to straw: like fire, my breath will devour you. 

Isa 33:12 The peoples will be burnt up as though by quicklime, like cut thorns they will be burnt on the fire. 

Isa 33:13 You who are far away, listen to what I have done, and you who are near, realise my strength”. 

Isa 33:14 The sinners in Zion are panic-stricken and fear seizes on the godless, “Which of us can survive the 
devouring fire, which of us survive everlasting burning?”. 

Isa 33:15 The one who acts uprightly and speaks honestly, who scorns to get rich by extortion, who rejects 
bribes out of hand, who refuses to listen to plans involving bloodshed and shuts his eyes rather than 
countenance crime: 

Isa 33:16 such a man will live on the heights, the craggy rocks will be his refuge, he will be fed, he will not want 
for water. 

Isa 33:17 Your eyes will gaze on the king in his beauty, they will look on a country stretching far and wide. 

Isa 33:18 Your heart will meditate on past terrors, “Where is the man who did the counting? Where is the man 
who did the weighing? Where is the man who counted off the towers?”. 

Isa 33:19 No more will you see that insolent people, that people of unintelligible speech, of barbarous and 
meaningless tongue. 

Isa 33:20 Gaze at Zion, city of our feasts; your eyes will see Jerusalem as a home that is secure, a tent not to 
be moved, none of its tent-pegs ever to be pulled out, none of its guy-ropes ever to be broken. 

Isa 33:21 There it is that Yahweh shows us his power, like a place of rivers and very wide canals on which will 
row no galley, over which will pass no majestic ship. 

Isa 33:22 (For Yahweh is our judge, Yahweh our lawgiver, Yahweh is our king and our Saviour.) 

Isa 33:23 Your tackle has given way, it cannot support the mast, it cannot hoist the pennon. And so there is 
much booty to be shared out; the lame fall to plundering, 

Isa 33:24 and no one living there will say, “I am sickly”; the people living there will find their guilt forgiven. 

Isa 34:1 Come near and listen, you nations, pay attention, you peoples. Let the earth and its contents listen, the 
world and its entire population. 

Isa 34:2 For Yahweh is angry with all the nations, enraged with all their hordes. He has vowed them to 
destruction, handed them over to slaughter. 

Isa 34:3 Their dead will be thrown away, the stench will rise from their corpses, the mountains will run with their 
blood, 

Isa 34:4 the entire array of heaven will fall apart. The heavens will be rolled up like a scroll and all their array will 
fade away, as fade the leaves falling from the vine, as fade those falling from the fig tree. 

Isa 34:5 For my sword has drunk deep in the heavens: see how it now falls on Edom, on the people vowed to 
destruction, to punish them. 

Isa 34:6 Yahweh’s sword is gorged with blood, it is greasy with fat, with the blood of lambs and goats, with the 
fat of the kidneys of rams. For Yahweh has a sacrifice in Bozrah, a great slaughter in the land of Edom. 

Isa 34:7 The wild oxen will fall with them, the bullocks with the bulls; their land will be drenched with blood and 
their dust will be greasy with fat. 

Isa 34:8 For this will be Yahweh’s day of vengeance, the year of retribution in Zion’s lawsuit. 

Isa 34:9 Its streams will turn into pitch, its dust into brimstone, its country will turn into blazing pitch. 

Isa 34:10 Never quenched night or day, its smoke rising for ever, it will lie waste age after age, no one will travel 
through it for ever and ever. 

Isa 34:1 1 It will be the haunt of pelican and hedgehog, the owl and the raven will live there; over it Yahweh will 
stretch the measuring line of chaos and the plumb-line of emptiness. 

Isa 34:12 There will be no more nobles to proclaim the royal authority; there will be an end of all its princes. 

Isa 34: 1 3 Brambles will grow in its bastions, nettles and thorn-bushes in its fortresses, it will be the lair of 
jackals, an enclosure for ostriches. 

Isa 34:14 Wild cats will meet hyenas there, satyr will call to satyr, there Lilith too will lurk and find somewhere to 
rest. 

Isa 34:15 The snake will nest and lay eggs there, will hatch and gather its young into the shade; and there the 



vultures will assemble, each one with its mate. 

Isa 34:16 Search in Yahweh’s book, and read, not one of these will be missing, not one of them lacking a mate; 
for thus his mouth has ordained it, and his spirit has brought them together. 

Isa 34:17 He has thrown the lot for each, his hand has measured out their share; they will possess it for ever, 
and live there age after age. 

Isa 35:1 Let the desert and the dry lands be glad, let the wasteland rejoice and bloom; like the asphodel, 

Isa 35:2 let it burst into flower, let it rejoice and sing for joy. The glory of Lebanon is bestowed on it, the 
splendour of Carmel and Sharon; then they will see the glory of Yahweh, the splendour of our God. 

Isa 35:3 Strengthen all weary hands, steady all trembling knees 

Isa 35:4 and say to the faint-hearted, “Be strong! Do not be afraid. Here is your God, vengeance is coming, 
divine retribution; he is coming to save you”. 

Isa 35:5 Then the eyes of the blind will be opened, the ears of the deaf unsealed, 

Isa 35:6 then the lame will leap like a deer and the tongue of the dumb sing for joy; for water will gush in the 
desert and streams in the wastelands, 

Isa 35:7 the parched ground will become a marsh and the thirsty land springs of water; the lairs where the 
jackals used to live will become plots of reed and papyrus. 

Isa 35:8 And through it will run a road for them and a highway which will be called the Sacred Way; the unclean 
will not be allowed to use it; He will be the one to use this road, the fool will not stray along it. 

Isa 35:9 No lion will be there, no ferocious beast set foot on it, nothing of the sort be found; it will be used by the 
redeemed. 

Isa 35:10 For those whom Yahweh has ransomed will return, they will come to Zion shouting for joy, their heads 
crowned with joy unending; rejoicing and gladness will escort them and sorrow and sighing will take flight. 

Isa 36:1 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria advanced on all the fortified towns 
of Judah and captured them. 

Isa 36:2 From Lachish the king of Assyria sent the cupbearer-in-chief with a large force to King Hezekiah in 
Jerusalem. The cupbearer-in-chief took up position near the conduit of the upper pool on the road to the Fuller’s 
Field. 

Isa 36:3 The master of the palace, Eliakim son of Hilkiah, Shebna the secretary and the herald Joah son of 
Asaph went out to him. 

Isa 36:4 The cupbearer-in-chief said to them, “Say to Hezekiah, ‘The great king, the king of Assyria, says this: 
What makes you so confident? 

Isa 36:5 Do you think empty words are as good as strategy and military strength? Who are you relying on, to 
dare to rebel against me? 

Isa 36:6 There you are, relying on that broken reed, Egypt, which pricks and pierces the hand of the person who 
leans on it. That is what Pharaoh king of Egypt is like to all who rely on him. 

Isa 36:7 You may say to me: We rely on Yahweh our God. But haven’t his high places and altars been 
suppressed by Hezekiah, who told Judah and Jerusalem: This is the altar before which you must worship? 

Isa 36:8 Very well, then, make a wager with my lord the king of Assyria: I will give you two thousand horses if 
you can find horsemen to ride them. 

Isa 36:9 How could you repulse a single one of the least of my master’s soldiers? And yet you have relied on 
Egypt for chariots and horsemen. 

Isa 36:10 And lastly, have I marched on this country to lay it waste without warrant from Yahweh? Yahweh 
himself said to me: March on this country and lay it waste’. 

Isa 36:1 1 Eliakim, Shebna and Joah said to the cupbearer-in-chief, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, 
for we understand it; do not speak to us in the Judaean language within earshot of the people on the ramparts”. 
Isa 36:12 But the cupbearer-in-chief said, “Do you think my lord sent me here to say these things to your master 
or to you? On the contrary, it was to the people sitting on the ramparts who, like you, are doomed to eat their 
own dung and drink their own urine”. 

Isa 36: 1 3 The cupbearer-in-chief then drew himself up and shouted loudly in the Judaean language, “Listen to 
the words of the great king, the king of Assyria. 

Isa 36:14 The king says this, ‘Do not let Hezekiah delude you! He will be powerless to save you. 

Isa 36:15 Do not let Hezekiah persuade you to rely on Yahweh by saying: Yahweh is sure to save us; this city 
will not fall into the king of Assyria’s clutches. 

Isa 36:16 Do not listen to Hezekiah, for the king of Assyria says this: Make peace with me, 

Isa 36:17 surrender to me, and every one of you will be free to eat the fruit of his own vine and of his own fig 
tree and to drink the water of his own storage-well until I come and take you away to a country like your own, a 
land of corn and good wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 

Isa 36:18 Do not let Hezekiah delude you by saying: Yahweh will save us. Has any god of any nation been able 
to save his country from the king of Assyria’s clutches? 



Isa 36:19 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Where are the 
national gods of Samaria? Did they save Samaria from my clutches? 

Isa 36:20 Of all the national gods, which ones have saved their countries from my clutches, that Yahweh should 
be able to save Jerusalem from my clutches?’”. 

Isa 36:21 They, however, kept quiet and said nothing in reply, since the king had given the order, “You are not to 
answer him”. 

Isa 36:22 The master of the palace, Eliakim son of Hilkiah, Shebna the secretary and the herald Joah son of 
Asaph, with their clothes torn, went to Hezekiah and reported what the cupbearer-in-chief had said. 

Isa 37:1 On hearing this, King Hezekiah tore his clothes, put on sackcloth and went to the Temple of Yahweh. 

Isa 37:2 He sent Eliakim master of the palace, Shebna the secretary and the elders of the priests, wearing 
sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz. 

Isa 37:3 They said to him, “This is what Hezekiah says, ‘Today is a day of suffering, of punishment, of disgrace. 
Children come to birth and there is no strength to bring them forth. 

Isa 37:4 May Yahweh your God hear the words of the cupbearer-in-chief whom his master, the king of Assyria, 
has sent to insult the living God, and may Yahweh your God punish the words he has heard! Offer your prayer 
for the remnant still left’”. 

Isa 37:5 When King Hezekiah’s ministers came to Isaiah, 

Isa 37:6 he said to them, “Say to your master, ‘Yahweh says this: Do not be afraid of the words which you have 
heard or the blasphemies which the king of Assyria’s minions have uttered against me. 

Isa 37:7 Look, I am going to put a spirit in him and, on the strength of a rumour, he will go back to his own 
country, and in that country I shall make him fall by the sword’”. 

Isa 37:8 The cupbearer turned about and rejoined the king of Assyria, who was then attacking Libnah, the 
cupbearer having learnt that the king had already left Lachish 

Isa 37:9 on hearing that Tirhakah king of Cush was on his way to attack him. Sennacherib again sent 
messengers to Hezekiah, saying, 

Isa 37:10 “Tell Hezekiah king of Judah this, ‘Do not let your God on whom you are relying deceive you with the 
promise: Jerusalem will not fall into the king of Assyria’s clutches. 

Isa 37:11 You have learnt by now what the kings of Assyria have done to all the other countries, putting them 
under the curse of destruction. Are you likely to be saved? 

Isa 37:12 Did the gods of the nations whom my ancestors devastated save them-Gozan, Haran, Rezeph and 
the Edenites who were in Tel Basar? 

Isa 37:13 Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, the king of Lair, of Sepharvaim, of Hena, of Ivvah?’”. 
Isa 37:14 Hezekiah took the letter from the messengers’ hands and read it; he then went up to the Temple of 
Yahweh and spread it out before Yahweh. 

Isa 37:15 Hezekiah said this prayer in the presence of Yahweh, 

Isa 37:16 “Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, enthroned on the winged creatures, you alone are God of all the 
kingdoms of the world, you made heaven and earth. 

Isa 37:17 Give ear, Yahweh, and listen; open your eyes, Yahweh, and see! Hear the words of Sennacherib, who 
has sent to insult the living God. 

Isa 37:18 It is true, Yahweh, that the kings of Assyria have destroyed all the nations (and their countries); 

Isa 37:19 they have thrown their gods on the fire, for these were not gods but human artefacts — wood and 
stone — and hence they have destroyed them. 

Isa 37:20 But now, Yahweh our God, save us from his clutches, I beg you, and let all the kingdoms of the world 
know that you alone are God, Yahweh”. 

Isa 37:21 Isaiah son of Amoz then sent the following message to Hezekiah, “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, 

‘In answer to the prayer which you have addressed to me about Sennacherib king of Assyria. 

Isa 37:22 Here is the pronouncement which Yahweh has made about him: She despises you, she scorns you, 
the virgin daughter of Zion; she tosses her head at you, the daughter of Jerusalem! 

Isa 37:23 Whom have you insulted, whom did you blaspheme? Against whom raised your voice and lifted your 
haughty eyes? Against the Holy One of Israel. 

Isa 37:24 Through your minions you have insulted the Lord, thinking: With my many chariots I have climbed the 
mountain-tops, the utmost peaks of Lebanon. I have felled its mighty cedars, its finest cypresses, have reached 
its furthest peak, its forest garden. 

Isa 37:25 Yes, I have dug and drunk of foreign waters; under the soles of my feet I have dried up all Egypt’s 
rivers. 

Isa 37:26 Do you hear? Long ago I prepared this, from days of old I actually planned it, now I carry it out. You 
were to lay walled cities in heaps of ruins; 

Isa 37:27 that was why their inhabitants, feeble of hand, were dismayed and discomfited, were weak as grass, 
were frail as plants, were like grass of housetop and meadow under the east wind. 



Isa 37:28 But whether you stand up or sit down, whether you go out or come in, I know it (and how you rave 
against me). 

Isa 37:29 Because you have raved against me and your arrogance has reached my ears, I shall put a hook 
through your nostrils and a muzzle on your lips, and make you return by the road by which you came. 

Isa 37:30 And this will be the sign for you: This year will be eaten the self-sown grain, next year what sprouts in 
the fallow; but in the third year sow and reap, plant vineyards and eat their fruit. 

Isa 37:31 The surviving remnant of the House of Judah will bring forth new roots below and fruits above; 

Isa 37:32 for a remnant will issue from Jerusalem, and survivors from Mount Zion. Yahweh Sabaoth’s jealous 
love will accomplish this’. 1 

Isa 37:33 “This, then, is what Yahweh says about the king of Assyria: He will not enter this city, will shoot no 
arrow at it, confront it with no shield, throw up no earthwork against it. 

Isa 37:34 By the road by which he came, by that he will return; he will not enter this city, declares Yahweh. 

Isa 37:35 I shall protect this city and save it for my sake and my servant David’s sake”. 

Isa 37:36 That same night the angel of Yahweh went out and struck down a hundred and eighty-five thousand 
men in the Assyrian camp. In the early morning when it was time to get up, there they lay, so many corpses. 

Isa 37:37 Sennacherib struck camp and left; he returned home and stayed in Nineveh. 

Isa 37:38 One day when he was worshipping in the temple of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and 
Sharezer struck him down with the sword and escaped into the territory of Ararat. His son Esarhaddon 
succeeded him. 

Isa 38:1 About then, Hezekiah fell ill and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz came and 
said to him, “Yahweh says this, ‘Put your affairs in order, for you are going to die, you will not live’”. 

Isa 38:2 Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and addressed this prayer to Yahweh, 

Isa 38:3 “Ah, Yahweh, remember, I beg you, that I have behaved faithfully and with sincerity of heart in your 
presence and done what you regard as right”. And Hezekiah shed many tears. 

Isa 38:4 Then the word of Yahweh came to Isaiah, 

Isa 38:5 “Go and say to Hezekiah, ‘Yahweh, the God of your ancestor David, says this: I have heard your prayer 
and seen your tears. I shall cure you: in three days’ time you will go up to the Temple of Yahweh. I shall add 
fifteen years to your life. 

Isa 38:6 I shall save you and this city from the king of Assyria’s clutches and defend this city for my sake and my 
servant David’s sake’. ’ 

Isa 38:7 “Here”, Isaiah replied, “is the sign from Yahweh that he will do what he has said. 

Isa 38:8 Look, I shall make the shadow cast by the declining sun on the steps — the steps to Ahaz’s roof-room- 
go back ten steps”. And the sun went back the ten steps by which it had declined. 

Isa 38:9 Canticle of Hezekiah king of Judah after his illness and recovery. 

Isa 38:10 I thought: In the noon of my life I am to depart. At the gates of Sheol I shall be held for the rest of my 

days. 

Isa 38:1 1 I thought: I shall never see Yahweh again in the land of the living, I shall never see again a single one 
of those who live on earth. 

Isa 38:12 My home has been pulled up, and thrown away like a shepherd’s tent; like a weaver, I have rolled up 

my life, he has cut me from the loom. From dawn to dark, you have been making an end of me; 

Isa 38:13 till daybreak, I cried for help; like a lion, he has crushed all my bones, from dawn to dark, you have 
been making an end of me. 

Isa 38:14 I twitter like a swallow, I moan like a dove, my eyes have grown dim from looking up. Lord, I am 
overwhelmed, come to my help. 

Isa 38:15 How can I speak and what can I say to him? He is the one to act. I must eke out the rest of my years 
in bitterness of soul. 

Isa 38:16 The Lord is over them; they live, and everything in them lives by his spirit. You will cure me. Restore 
me to life. 

Isa 38:17 At once, my bitterness turns to well-being. For you have preserved my soul from the pit of 
nothingness, you have thrust all my sins behind you. 

Isa 38:18 For Sheol cannot praise you, nor Death celebrate you; those who go down to the pit can hope no 
longer in your constancy. 

Isa 38:19 The living, the living are the ones who praise you, as I do today. Fathers tell their sons about your 
constancy. 

Isa 38:20 Yahweh, come to my help and we will make our harps resound all the days of our life in the Temple of 
Yahweh. 

Isa 38:21 “Bring a fig poultice”, Isaiah said, “apply it to the ulcer and he will recover”. 

Isa 38:22 Hezekiah said, “What is the sign to tell me that I shall be going up to the Temple of Yahweh?”. 

Isa 39:1 At that time, the king of Babylon, Merodach-Baladan son of Baladan, sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah, 



for he had heard of his illness and his recovery. 

Isa 39:2 Hezekiah was delighted at this and showed the ambassadors his entire treasury, the silver, gold, 
spices, precious oil, his armoury too, and everything to be seen in his storehouses. There was nothing in his 
palace or in his whole domain that Hezekiah did not show them. 

Isa 39:3 The prophet Isaiah then came to King Hezekiah and asked him, “What have these men said, and where 
have they come to you from?”. Hezekiah answered, “They have come from a distant country, from Babylon”. 

Isa 39:4 Isaiah said, “What have they seen in your palace?”. “They have seen everything in my palace”, Hezekiah 
answered. “There is nothing in my storehouses that I have not shown them”. 

Isa 39:5 Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Listen to the word of Yahweh Sabaoth, 

Isa 39:6 ‘The days are coming when everything in your palace, everything that your ancestors have amassed 
until now, will be carried off to Babylon. Not a thing will be left’, Yahweh says. 

Isa 39:7 ‘Sons sprung from you, sons begotten by you, will be abducted to be eunuchs in the palace of the king 
of Babylon’”. 

Isa 39:8 Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “This word of Yahweh that you announce is reässuring”, for he was thinking, 
“There is going to be peace and security during my lifetime”. 

Isa 40:1 “Console my people, console them”, says your God. 

Isa 40:2 “Speak to the heart of Jerusalem and cry to her that her period of service is ended, that her guilt has 
been atoned for, that, from the hand of Yahweh, she has received double punishment for all her sins”. 

Isa 40:3 A voice cries, “Prepare in the desert a way for Yahweh. Make a straight highway for our God across the 
wastelands. 

Isa 40:4 Let every valley be filled in, every mountain and hill be levelled, every cliff become a plateau, every 
escarpment a plain; 

Isa 40:5 then the glory of Yahweh will be revealed and all humanity will see it together, for the mouth of Yahweh 
has spoken”. 

Isa 40:6 A voice said, “Cry aloud!”. and I said, “What shall I cry?”. -'All humanity is grass and all its beauty like the 
wild flower’s. 

Isa 40:7 The grass withers, the flower fades when the breath of Yahweh blows on them. (The grass is surely the 
people.) 

Isa 40:8 The grass withers, the flower fades, but the word of our God remains for ever”. 

Isa 40:9 Go up on a high mountain, messenger of Zion. Shout as loud as you can, messenger of Jerusalem! 
Shout fearlessly, say to the towns of Judah, “Here is your God”. 

Isa 40:10 Here is Lord Yahweh coming with power, his arm maintains his authority, his reward is with him and 
his prize precedes him. 

Isa 40:1 1 He is like a shepherd feeding his flock, gathering lambs in his arms, holding them against his breast 
and leading to their rest the mother ewes. 

Isa 40:12 Who was it measured the water of the sea in the hollow of his hand and calculated the heavens to the 
nearest inch, gauged the dust of the earth to the nearest bushel, weighed the mountains in scales, the hills in a 
balance? 

Isa 40:13 Who directed the spirit of Yahweh, what counsellor could have instructed him? 

Isa 40:14 Whom has he consulted to enlighten him, to instruct him in the path of judgement, to teach him 
knowledge and show him how to understand? 

Isa 40:15 See, the nations are like a drop in a bucket, they count as a grain of dust on the scales. See, coasts 
and islands weigh no more than fine powder. 

Isa 40:16 The Lebanon is not enough for the burning fires nor its animals enough for the burnt offering. 

Isa 40:17 All the nations are as nothing before him, for him they count as nothingness and emptiness. 

Isa 40:18 To whom can you compare God? What image can you contrive of him? 

Isa 40:19 The craftsman casts an idol, a goldsmith overlays it with gold and casts silver chains for it. 

Isa 40:20 Someöne too poor to afford a sacrifice chooses a piece of wood that will not rot; he then seeks out a 
skilled craftsman to set up an idol that will not totter. 

Isa 40:21 Did you not know, had you not heard? Was it not told you from the beginning? Have you not 
understood how the earth was set on its foundations? 

Isa 40:22 He who sits enthroned above the circle of the earth, the inhabitants of which are like grasshoppers, 
stretches out the heavens like a cloth, spreads them out like a tent to live in. 

Isa 40:23 He reduces princes to nothing, the rulers of the world to mere emptiness. 

Isa 40:24 Scarcely are they planted, scarcely sown, scarcely has their stem taken root in the soil, than he blows 
on them and they wither and the storm carries them away like chaff. 

Isa 40:25 “To whom can you compare me, or who is my equal?”. says the Holy One. 

Isa 40:26 Lift your eyes and look: he who created these things leads out their army in order, summoning each of 
them by name. So mighty is his power, so great his strength, that not one fails to answer. 



Isa 40:27 How can you say, Jacob, how can you repeat, Israel, “My way is hidden from Yahweh, my rights are 
ignored by my God'? 

Isa 40:28 Did you not know? Had you not heard? Yahweh is the everlasting God, he created the remotest parts 
of the earth. He does not grow tired or weary, his understanding is beyond fathoming. 

Isa 40:29 He gives strength to the weary, he strengthens the powerless. 

Isa 40:30 Youths grow tired and weary, the young stumble and fall, 

Isa 40:31 but those who hope in Yahweh will regain their strength, they will sprout wings like eagles, though 
they run they will not grow weary, though they walk they will never tire. 

Isa 41:1 Coasts and islands, fall silent before me, and let the peoples renew their strength, let them come 
forward and speak; let us assemble for judgement. 

Isa 41 :2 “Who has raised from the east him whom saving justice summons in its train, him to whom Yahweh 
delivers up the nations and subjects kings, him who reduces them to dust with his sword, and to driven stubble 
with his bow, 

Isa 41 :3 him who pursues them and advances unhindered, his feet scarcely touching the road? 

Isa 41 :4 Who has acted thus, who has done this? He who calls each generation from the beginning: I, Yahweh, 
who am the first and till the last I shall still be there”. 

Isa 41 :5 The coasts and islands have seen and taken fright, the remotest parts of earth are trembling: they are 
approaching, they are here! 

Isa 41 :6 People help one another, they say to each other, “Take heart!”. 

Isa 41 :7 The woodworker encourages the smelter, the polisher encourages the hammerer, saying of the 
soldering, “It is sound”; and he fastens it with nails to keep it steady. 

Isa 41 :8 But you, Israel, my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, descendant of Abraham my friend, 

Isa 41:9 whom I have taken to myself, from the remotest parts of the earth and summoned from countries far 
away, to whom I have said, “You are my servant, I have chosen you, I have not rejected you”, 

Isa 41:10 do not be afraid, for I am with you; do not be alarmed, for I am your God. I give you strength, truly I 
help you, truly I hold you firm with my saving right hand. 

Isa 41:11 Look, all those who rage against you will be put to shame and humiliated; those who picked quarrels 
with you will be reduced to nothing and will perish. 

Isa 41:12 You will look for them but will not find them, those who used to fight you; they will be destroyed and 
brought to nothing, those who made war on you. 

Isa 41:13 For I, Yahweh, your God, I grasp you by your right hand; I tell you, “Do not be afraid, I shall help you”. 
Isa 41:14 Do not be afraid, Jacob, you worm! You little handful of Israel! I shall help you, declares Yahweh; your 
redeemer is the Holy One of Israel. 

Isa 41:15 Look, I am making you into a threshing-sledge, new, with double teeth; you will thresh and beat the 
mountains to dust and reduce the hills to straw. 

Isa 41:16 You will winnow them and the wind will carry them off, the gale will scatter them; whereäs you will 
rejoice in Yahweh, will glory in the Holy One of Israel. 

Isa 41:17 The oppressed and needy search for water, and there is none, their tongue is parched with thirst. I, 
Yahweh, shall answer them, I, the God of Israel, shall not abandon them. 

Isa 41:18 I shall open up rivers on barren heights and water-holes down in the ravines; I shall turn the desert 
into a lake and dry ground into springs of water. 

Isa 41:19 I shall plant the desert with cedar trees, acacias, myrtles and olives; in the wastelands I shall put 
cypress trees, plane trees and box trees side by side; 

Isa 41 :20 so that people may see and know, so that they may all observe and understand that the hand of 
Yahweh has done this, that the Holy One of Israel has created it. 

Isa 41 :21 “Present your case”, says Yahweh, “Produce your arguments”, says Jacob’s king. 

Isa 41 :22 “Let them produce and reveal to us what is going to happen. What happened in the past? Reveal it so 
that we can consider it and know what the outcome will be. Or tell us about the future, 

Isa 41 :23 reveal what is to happen next, and then we shall know that you are gods. At least, do something, be it 
good or bad, so that we may feel alarm and fear. 

Isa 41:24 Look, you are less than nothingness, and what you do is less than nothing; to choose you is an 
outrage”. 

Isa 41:25 I have raised him from the north and he has come, from the east he has been summoned by name. 

He tramples on rulers like mud, like a potter treading clay. 

Isa 41 :26 Who revealed this from the beginning for us to know, and in the past for us to say, “That is right'? No 
one in fact revealed it, no one proclaimed it, no one has heard you speak. 

Isa 41 .21 First-fruits of Zion, look, here they come! I send a messenger to Jerusalem, 

Isa 41 :28 and I look — no one, not a single counsellor among them who, if I asked, could give an answer. 

Isa 41 :29 Taken altogether they are nothingness, what they do is nothing, their statues, wind and emptiness. 



Isa 42:1 Here is my servant whom I uphold, my chosen one in whom my soul delights. I have sent my spirit 
upon him, he will bring fair judgement to the nations. 

Isa 42:2 He does not cry out or raise his voice, his voice is not heard in the street; 

Isa 42:3 he does not break the crushed reed or snuff the faltering wick. Faithfully he presents fair judgement; 

Isa 42:4 he will not grow faint, he will not be crushed until he has established fair judgement on earth, and the 
coasts and islands are waiting for his instruction. 

Isa 42:5 Thus says God, Yahweh, who created the heavens and spread them out, who hammered into shape 
the earth and what comes from it, who gave breath to the people on it, and spirit to those who walk on it: 

Isa 42:6 I, Yahweh, have called you in saving justice, I have grasped you by the hand and shaped you; I have 
made you a covenant of the people and light to the nations, 

Isa 42:7 to open the eyes of the blind, to free captives from prison, and those who live in darkness from the 
dungeon. 

Isa 42:8 I am Yahweh, that is my name! I shall not yield my glory to another, nor my honour to idols. 

Isa 42:9 See how the former predictions have come true. Fresh things I now reveal; before they appear I tell you 

of them. 

Isa 42:10 Sing a new song to Yahweh! Let his praise be sung from remotest parts of the earth by those who sail 
the sea and by everything in it, by the coasts and islands and those who inhabit them. 

Isa 42:1 1 Let the desert and its cities raise their voices, the encampments where Kedar lives. Let the inhabitants 
of the Rock cry aloud for joy and shout from the mountain tops. 

Isa 42:12 Let them give glory to Yahweh and, in the coasts and islands, let them voice his praise. 

Isa 42:13 Yahweh advances like a hero, like a warrior he rouses his fire. He shouts, he raises the war cry, he 
shows his might against his foes. 

Isa 42:14 “From long ago I have been silent, I have kept quiet, held myself in check, groaning like a woman in 
labour, panting and gasping for air. 

Isa 42:15 I shall ravage mountain and hill, shall wither all their vegetation; I shall turn the torrents into firm 
ground and dry up the marshes. 

Isa 42:16 I shall lead the blind by a road they do not know, by paths they do not know I shall conduct them. I 
shall turn the darkness into light before them and the quagmires into solid ground. This I shall do — without fail”. 
Isa 42:17 Those who trust in idols will recoil, they will blush for shame, who say to metal images, “You are our 
gods”. 

Isa 42:18 Listen, you deaf! Look and see, you blind! 

Isa 42:19 Who so blind as my servant, so deaf as the messenger I send? (Who so blind as the friend I have 
taken to myself, so deaf as Yahweh’s servant?) 

Isa 42:20 You have seen many things but not observed them; your ears are open but you do not hear. 

Isa 42:21 Yahweh wished, because of his saving justice, to make the Law great and glorious. 

Isa 42:22 Yet here is a people pillaged and plundered, all of them shut up in caves, imprisoned in dungeons. 
They have been pillaged, with no one to rescue them, plundered, with no one to say, “Give it back!”. 

Isa 42:23 Which of you will listen to this, who pay attention and listen in future? 

Isa 42:24 Who surrendered Jacob to the plunderer and Israel to the pillagers? Was it not Yahweh, against 
whom we had sinned, in whose ways they would not walk and whose Law they would not obey? 

Isa 42:25 On him he poured out his blazing anger and the fury of war; it enveloped him in flames and yet he did 
not understand; it burned him up, but he did not learn a lesson. 

Isa 43:1 And now, thus says Yahweh, he who created you, Jacob, who formed you, Israel: Do not be afraid, for I 
have redeemed you; I have called you by your name, you are mine. 

Isa 43:2 Should you pass through the waters, I shall be with you; or through rivers, they will not swallow you up. 
Should you walk through fire, you will not suffer, and the flame will not burn you. 

Isa 43:3 For I am Yahweh, your God, the Holy One of Israel, your Saviour. I have given Egypt for your ransom, 
Cush and Seba in exchange for you. 

Isa 43:4 Since I regard you as precious, since you are honoured and I love you, I therefore give people in 
exchange for you, and nations in return for your life. 

Isa 43:5 Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I shall bring your offspring from the east, and gather you from the 
west. 

Isa 43:6 To the north I shall say, “Give them up!”. and to the south, “Do not hold them back!”. Bring back my sons 
from far away, and my daughters from the remotest part of the earth, 

Isa 43:7 everyone who bears my name, whom I have created for my glory, whom I have formed, whom I have 
made. 

Isa 43:8 Bring forward the people that is blind, yet has eyes, that is deaf and yet has ears. 

Isa 43:9 Let all the nations assemble, let the peoples gather here! Which of them has proclaimed this and 
revealed things to us in the past? Let them bring their witnesses to justify themselves, let others hear and say, “It 



is true”. 

Isa 43:10 You yourselves are my witnesses, declares Yahweh, and the servant whom I have chosen, so that 
you may know and believe me and understand that it is I. No god was formed before me, nor will be after me. 

Isa 43:1 1 I, I am Yahweh, and there is no other Saviour but me. 

Isa 43:12 I have revealed, have saved, and have proclaimed, not some foreigner among you. You are my 
witnesses, declares Yahweh, I am God, 

Isa 43:13 yes, from eternity I am. No one can deliver from my hand; when I act, who can thwart me? 

Isa 43:14 Thus says Yahweh, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: For your sake I have sent to Babylon, I 
shall knock down all the prison bars, and the Chaldaeans’ shouts of joy will change to lamentations. 

Isa 43:15 I am Yahweh, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your king. 

Isa 43:16 Thus says Yahweh, who made a way through the sea, a path in the raging waters, 

Isa 43:17 who led out chariot and horse together with an army of picked troops: they lay down never to rise 
again, they were snuffed out, put out like a wick. 

Isa 43:18 No need to remember past events, no need to think about what was done before. 

Isa 43:19 Look, I am doing something new, now it emerges; can you not see it? Yes, I am making a road in the 
desert and rivers in wastelands. 

Isa 43:20 The wild animals will honour me, the jackals and the ostriches, for bestowing water in the desert and 
rivers on the wastelands for my people, my chosen one, to drink. 

Isa 43:21 The people I have shaped for myself will broadcast my praises. 

Isa 43:22 But, Jacob, you have not invoked me; no, Israel, you have grown weary of me. 

Isa 43:23 You have not brought me lambs as your burnt offerings and have not honoured me with your 
sacrifices. I have not subjected you to cereal offering, I have not wearied you by demanding incense. 

Isa 43:24 You have not bought expensive reed for me or sated me with the fat of your sacrifices. Instead by 
your sins you have trected me like a slave, you have wearied me with your crimes, 

Isa 43:25 I, I it is who blot out your acts of revolt for my own sake and shall not call your sins to mind. 

Isa 43:26 Remind me, and we will judge this together; state your own case and justify yourself. 

Isa 43:27 Your first ancestor sinned, your interpreters revolted against me. 

Isa 43:28 That is why I deposed the chief men of my sanctuary, why I put Jacob under the curse of destruction 
and subjected Israel to insult. 

Isa 44:1 And now listen, Jacob my servant, Israel whom I have chosen. 

Isa 44:2 Thus says Yahweh who made you, who formed you in the womb; he will help you. Do not be afraid, 
Jacob my servant, Jeshurun whom I have chosen. 

Isa 44:3 For I shall pour out water on the thirsty soil and streams on the dry ground. I shall pour out my spirit on 
your descendants, my blessing on your offspring, 

Isa 44:4 and they will spring up among the grass, like willows on the banks of a stream. 

Isa 44:5 One person will say, “I belong to Yahweh”, another will call himself by Jacob’s name. On his hand 
another will write ‘Yahweh’s’ and be surnamed ‘Israel’. 

Isa 44:6 Thus says Yahweh, Israel’s king, Yahweh Sabaoth, his redeemer: I am the first and I am the last; there 
is no God except me. 

Isa 44:7 Who is like me? Let him call out, let him affirm it and convince me it is so; let him say what has been 
happening since I instituted an eternal people, and predict to them what will happen next! 

Isa 44:8 Have no fear, do not be afraid: have I not told you and revealed it long ago? You are my witnesses. Is 
there any God except me? There is no Rock; I know of none. 

Isa 44:9 The makers of idols are all nothingness; the works they delight in serve no purpose. And these are the 
witness against them: they see nothing, they know nothing; and so they will be put to shame. 

Isa 44:10 Who ever fashioned a god or cast an image without hope of gain? 

Isa 44:1 1 Watch how all its devotees will be put to shame, and the men who made it too, who are only human. 
Let them all assemble, let them stand forward and feel both fear and shame! 

Isa 44:12 The blacksmith makes an axe over the charcoal, beats it into shape with a hammer, works on it with 
his strong arm. Then he feels hungry and his strength deserts him; having drunk no water, he is exhausted. 

Isa 44:13 The wood carver takes his measurements, outlines the image with chalk, executes it with the chisel, 
following the outline with a compass. He makes it look like a human being, with human standards of beauty, so 
that it can reside in a house. 

Isa 44:14 He has cut down cedars, has selected an oak and a terebinth which he has grown for himself among 
the trees in the forest and has planted a pine tree which the rain has nourished. 

Isa 44:15 Once it is suitable to burn, he takes some of it to warm himself; having kindled it, he bakes bread. But 
he also makes a god and worships it; he makes an idol from it and bows down before it. 

Isa 44:16 Half of it he burns on the fire, over this half he roasts meat, eats it and is replete; at the same time he 
warms himself and says, “Ah, how warm I am, watching the flames!”. 



Isa 44:17 With the remainder he makes a god, his idol, bows down before it, worships it and prays to it. “Save 
me”, he says, “for you are my god”. 

Isa 44:18 They know nothing, they understand nothing, since their eyes are incapable of seeing and their hearts 
of reflecting. 

Isa 44:19 Not one of them looks into his heart, not one of them has the knowledge and wit to think, “I burned half 
of it on the fire and cooked food over the embers. Am I right to make something disgusting out of what is left? 

Am I right to bow down before a block of wood?”. 

Isa 44:20 He hankers after ashes, his deluded heart has led him astray; he will not save himself, he will not 
think, “What I have in my hand is nothing but a lie!”. 

Isa 44:21 Remember these things, Jacob, and Israel, since you are my servant. I formed you, you are my 
servant; Israel, I shall not forget you. 

Isa 44:22 I have dispelled your acts of revolt like a cloud and your sins like a mist. Come back to me, for I have 
redeemed you. 

Isa 44:23 Heavens, shout for joy, for Yahweh has acted! Underworld, shout aloud! Shout for joy, you mountains, 
forests and all your trees! For Yahweh has redeemed Jacob and displayed his glory in Israel. 

Isa 44:24 Thus says Yahweh, your redeemer, he who formed you in the womb: I, Yahweh, have made all 
things, I alone spread out the heavens. When I hammered the earth into shape, who was with me? 

Isa 44:25 I, who foil the omens of soothsayers and make fools of diviners, who confound sages turning their 
knowledge into folly, 

Isa 44:26 who confirm the word of my servant and make the plans of my envoys succeed; who say to 
Jerusalem, “You will be inhabited”, and to the towns of Judah, “You will be rebuilt and I shall restore the ruins of 
Jerusalem”; 

Isa 44:27 who say to the ocean, “Dry up! I shall make your rivers run dry”; 

Isa 44:28 who say to Cyrus, “My shepherd”. He will perform my entire will by saying to Jerusalem, “You will be 
rebuilt”, and to the Temple, “You will be refounded”. 

Isa 45:1 Thus says Yahweh to his anointed one, to Cyrus whom, he says, I have grasped by his right hand, to 
make the nations bow before him and to disarm kings, to open gateways before him so that their gates be closed 
no more: 

Isa 45:2 I myself shall go before you, I shall level the heights, I shall shatter the bronze gateways, I shall smash 
the iron bars. 

Isa 45:3 I shall give you secret treasures and hidden hoards of wealth, so that you will know that I am Yahweh, 
who call you by your name, the God of Israel. 

Isa 45:4 It is for the sake of my servant Jacob and of Israel my chosen one, that I have called you by your name, 
have given you a title though you do not know me. 

Isa 45:5 I am Yahweh, and there is no other, there is no other God except me. Though you do not know me, I 
have armed you 

Isa 45:6 so that it may be known from east to west that there is no one except me. I am Yahweh, and there is no 
other, 

Isa 45:7 I form the light and I create the darkness, I make well-being, and I create disaster, I, Yahweh, do all 
these things. 

Isa 45:8 Rain down, you heavens, from above, and let the clouds pour down saving justice, let the earth open 
up and blossom with salvation, and let justice sprout with it; I, Yahweh, have created it! 

Isa 45:9 Woe to anyone who argues with his Maker, one earthenware pot among many! Does the clay say to its 
potter, “What are you doing? Your work has no hands!”. 

Isa 45:10 Woe to anyone who asks a father, “Why are you begetting?”. and a woman, “Why are you giving birth?”. 
Isa 45:1 1 Thus says Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel and his Maker: I am asked for signs regarding my sons, I 
am given orders about the work I do. 

Isa 45:12 It was I who made the earth and I created human beings on it, mine were the hands that spread out 
the heavens and I have given the orders to all their array. 

Isa 45:13 I myself have raised him in saving justice and I shall make all paths level for him. He will rebuild my 
city and bring my exiles home without ransom or indemnity, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Isa 45:14 Thus says Yahweh: The produce of Egypt, the commerce of Cush and the men of Seba, tall of 
stature, will come over to you and belong to you. They will follow you, walking in chains, they will bow before 
you, they will pray to you, “With you alone is God, and there is no other! The gods do not exist”. 

Isa 45:15 Truly, you are a God who conceals himself, God of Israel, Saviour! 

Isa 45:16 They are shamed and humbled, every one of them, humiliated they go, the makers of idols. 

Isa 45:17 Israel will be saved by Yahweh, saved everlastingly. You will never be ashamed or humiliated for ever 
and ever. 

Isa 45:18 For thus says Yahweh, the Creator of the heavens — he is God, who shaped the earth and made it, 



who set it firm; he did not create it to be chaos, he formed it to be lived in: I am Yahweh, and there is no other. 

Isa 45:19 I have not spoken in secret, in some dark corner of the underworld. I did not say, “Offspring of Jacob, 
search for me in chaos!”. I am Yahweh: I proclaim saving justice, I say what is true. 

Isa 45:20 Assemble, come, all of you gather round, survivors of the nations. They have no knowledge, those 
who parade their wooden idols and pray to a god that cannot save. 

Isa 45:21 Speak up, present your case, let them put their heads together! Who foretold this in the past, who 
revealed it long ago? Was it not I, Yahweh? There is no other god except me, no saving God, no Saviour except 
me! 

Isa 45:22 Turn to me and you will be saved, all you ends of the earth, for I am God, and there is no other. 

Isa 45:23 By my own self I swear it; what comes from my mouth is saving justice, it is an irrevocable word: All 
shall bend the knee to me, by me every tongue shall swear, 

Isa 45:24 saying, “In Yahweh alone are saving justice and strength”, until all those who used to rage at him come 
to him in shame. 

Isa 45:25 In Yahweh the whole race of Israel finds justice and glory. 

Isa 46:1 Bel is crouching, Nebo cowering, their idols are being put on animals, on beasts of burden, the loads 
you have been carrying are a burden to a weary beast. 

Isa 46:2 They are cowering and crouching together, no one can save this burden, they themselves have gone 
into captivity. 

Isa 46:3 Listen to me, House of Jacob, all who remain of the House of Israel, whom I have carried since the 
womb, whom I have supported since you were conceived. 

Isa 46:4 Until your old age I shall be the same, until your hair is grey I shall carry you. As I have done, so I shall 
support you, I myself shall carry and shall save you. 

Isa 46:5 With whom can you compare me, equate me, to whom can you liken me, making equals of us? 

Isa 46:6 They lavish gold from their purses and weigh out silver on the scales. They engage a goldsmith to 
make a god, then bow low and actually adore! 

Isa 46:7 They lift it on their shoulders and carry it, and put it down where it is meant to stand, so that it never 
moves from the spot. You may cry out to it in distress, it never replies, it never saves anyone in trouble. 

Isa 46:8 Remember this and stand firm; rebels, look into your hearts. 

Isa 46:9 Remember the things that happened long ago, for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there 
is none like me. 

Isa 46:10 From the beginning I revealed the future, in advance, what has not yet occurred. I say: My purpose 
will come about, I shall do whatever I please; 

Isa 46:1 1 I call a bird of prey from the east, my man predestined, from a distant land. What I have said, I shall 
do, what I have planned, I shall perform. 

Isa 46:12 Listen to me, you hard-hearted people far removed from saving justice: 

Isa 46:13 I am bringing my justice nearer, it is not far away, my salvation will not delay. I shall place my 
salvation in Zion and my glory in Israel. 

Isa 47:1 Step down! Sit in the dust, virgin daughter of Babylon. Sit on the ground, no throne, daughter of the 
Chaldaeans, for never again will you be called tender and delicate. 

Isa 47:2 Take the grinding mill, crush up the meal. Remove your veil, tie up your skirt, bare your legs, cross the 
rivers. 

Isa 47:3 Let your nakedness be displayed and your shame exposed. I am going to take vengeance and no one 
will stand in my way. 

Isa 47:4 Our redeemer, Yahweh Sabaoth is his name, the Holy One of Israel, says: 

Isa 47:5 Sit in silence, bury yourself in darkness, daughter of the Chaldaeans, for never again will you be called 
the mistress of kingdoms. 

Isa 47:6 Being angry with my people, I rejected my heritage, surrendering them into your clutches. You showed 
them no mercy, you made your yoke very heavy on the aged. 

Isa 47:7 You thought, “I shall be a queen for ever”. You did not reflect on these matters or think about the future. 
Isa 47:8 Now listen to this, voluptuous woman, lolling at ease and thinking to yourself, “I am the only one who 
matters. I shall never be widowed, never know bereavement”. 

Isa 47:9 Yet both these things will befall you, suddenly, in one day. Bereavement and widowhood will suddenly 
befall you in spite of all your witchcraft and the potency of your spells. 

Isa 47:10 Confident in your wickedness, you thought, “No one can see me”. Your wishes and your knowledge 
were what deluded you, as you thought to yourself, “I am the only one who matters”. 

Isa 47:1 1 Hence, disaster will befall you which you will not know how to charm away, calamity overtake you 
which you will not be able to avert, ruination will suddenly befall you, such as you have never known. 

Isa 47:12 Keep to your spells then, and all your sorceries, at which you have worked so hard since you were 
young. Perhaps you will succeed, perhaps you will strike terror! 



Isa 47:13 You have had many tiring consultations: let the astrologers come forward now and save you, the star- 
gazers who announce month by month what will happen to you next. 

Isa 47:14 Look, they are like wisps of straw, the fire will burn them up. They will not save their lives from the 
power of the flame. No embers these, for keeping warm, no fire to sit beside! 

Isa 47:15 Such will your wizards prove to be for you, for whom you have worked so hard since you were young; 
each wandering his own way, none of them can save you. 

Isa 48:1 Listen to this, House of Jacob, you who are called by the name of Israel and issued from the waters of 
Judah, who swear by the name of Yahweh and invoke the God of Israel, though not in good faith or uprightness; 
Isa 48:2 for they call themselves after the holy city and rely on the God of Israel, Yahweh Sabaoth is his name. 
Isa 48:3 Things now past I revealed long ago, they issued from my mouth, I proclaimed them; suddenly I acted 
and they happened. 

Isa 48:4 For I knew you to be obstinate, your neck an iron sinew and your forehead bronze. 

Isa 48:5 As I told you about it long before, before it happened I revealed it to you, so that you could not say, “My 
statue did it, my idol, my metal image, ordained this”. 

Isa 48:6 You have heard and seen all this, why won’t you admit it? Now I am going to reveal new things to you, 
secrets that you do not know; 

Isa 48:7 they have just been created, not long ago, and until today you have heard nothing about them, so that 
you cannot say, “Yes, I knew about this”. 

Isa 48:8 No, you have not heard, you have not known, for a long time your ear has not been attentive, for I knew 
how treacherous you were; you have been called a rebel since the womb. 

Isa 48:9 For the sake of my name I shall defer my anger, for the sake of my honour I shall be patient with you, 
rather than destroy you. 

Isa 48:10 Look, I have purchased you, but not for silver, I have chosen you out of the cauldron of affliction. 

Isa 48:1 1 For my sake and my sake only shall I act, for why should my name be profaned? I will not yield my 
glory to another. 

Isa 48:12 Listen to me, Jacob, Israel whom I have called: I, and none else, am the first, I am also the last. 

Isa 48:13 My hand laid the foundations of earth and my right hand spread out the heavens. I summon them and 
they all present themselves together. 

Isa 48:14 Assemble, all of you, and listen; which of them has revealed this? Yahweh loves him; he will do his 
pleasure on Babylon and the race of the Chaldaeans; 

Isa 48:15 I, I have spoken, yes, I have summoned him, I have brought him, and he will succeed. 

Isa 48:16 Come near and listen to this: from the first, I never spoke obscurely; when it happened, I was there, 
and now Lord Yahweh has sent me with his spirit. 

Isa 48:17 Thus says Yahweh, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: I am Yahweh your God and teach you for 
your own good, I lead you in the way you ought to go. 

Isa 48:18 If only you had listened to my commandments! Your prosperity would have been like a river and your 
saving justice like the waves of the sea. 

Isa 48:19 Your descendants would have been numbered like the sand, your offspring as many as its grains. 
Their name would never be cancelled or blotted out from my presence. 

Isa 48:20 Come out from Babylon! Flee from the Chaldaeans! Declare this with cries of joy, proclaim it, carry it 
to the remotest parts of earth, say, “Yahweh has redeemed his servant Jacob”. 

Isa 48:21 Those he led through the arid country never went thirsty; he made water flow for them from the rock, 
he split the rock and out streamed the water. 

Isa 48:22 There is no peace, says Yahweh, for the wicked. 

Isa 49:1 Coasts and islands, listen to me, pay attention, distant peoples. Yahweh called me when I was in the 
womb, before my birth he had pronounced my name. 

Isa 49:2 He made my mouth like a sharp sword, he hid me in the shadow of his hand. He made me into a 
sharpened arrow and concealed me in his quiver. 

Isa 49:3 He said to me, “Israel, you are my servant, through whom I shall manifest my glory”. 

Isa 49:4 But I said, “My toil has been futile, I have exhausted myself for nothing, to no purpose”. Yet all the while 
my cause was with Yahweh and my reward with my God. 

Isa 49:5 And now Yahweh has spoken, who formed me in the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob back to 
him and to re-unite Israel to him;-l shall be honoured in Yahweh’s eyes, and my God has been my strength. - 
Isa 49:6 He said, “It is not enough for you to be my servant, to restore the tribes of Jacob and bring back the 
survivors of Israel; I shall make you a light to the nations so that my salvation may reach the remotest parts of 
earth”. 

Isa 49:7 Thus says Yahweh, the redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, to the one who is despised, detested by the 
nation, to the slave of despots: Kings will stand up when they see, princes will see and bow low, because of 
Yahweh who is faithful, the Holy One of Israel who has chosen you. 



Isa 49:8 Thus says Yahweh: At the time of my favour I have answered you, on the day of salvation I have 
helped you. I have formed you and have appointed you to be the covenant for a people, to restore the land, to 
return ravaged properties, 

Isa 49:9 to say to prisoners, “Come out”, to those who are in darkness, “Show yourselves”. Along the roadway 
they will graze, and any bare height will be their pasture. 

Isa 49:10 They will never hunger or thirst, scorching wind and sun will never plague them; for he who pities 
them will lead them, will guide them to springs of water. 

Isa 49:1 1 I shall turn all my mountains into a road and my highways will be raised aloft. 

Isa 49:12 Look! Here they come from far away, look, these from the north and the west, those from the land of 
Sinim. 

Isa 49:13 Shout for joy, you heavens; earth, exult! Mountains, break into joyful cries! For Yahweh has consoled 
his people, is taking pity on his afflicted ones. 

Isa 49:14 Zion was saying, “Yahweh has abandoned me, the Lord has forgotten me”. 

Isa 49:15 Can a woman forget her baby at the breast, feel no pity for the child she has borne? Even if these 
were to forget, I shall not forget you. 

Isa 49:16 Look, I have engraved you on the palms of my hands, your ramparts are ever before me. 

Isa 49:17 Your rebuilders are hurrying, your destroyers and despoilers will soon go away. 

Isa 49:18 Raise your eyes and look around you: all are assembling, coming to you. By my life, declares 
Yahweh, you will put them all on like jewels, like a bride, you will fasten them on. 

Isa 49:19 For your desolate places and your ruins and your devastated country from now on will be too cramped 
for your inhabitants, and your devourers will be far away. 

Isa 49:20 Once more they will say in your hearing, the children of whom you were bereft, “The place is too 
cramped for me, make room for me to live”. 

Isa 49:21 Then you will think to yourself, “Who has borne me these? I was bereft and barren, exiled, turned out 
of my home; who has reared these? I was left all alone, so where have these come from?”. 

Isa 49:22 Thus says Lord Yahweh: Look, I am beckoning to the nations and hoisting a signal to the peoples: 
they will bring your sons in their arms and your daughters will be carried on their shoulders. 

Isa 49:23 Kings will be your foster-fathers and their princesses, your foster-mothers. They will fall prostrate 
before you, faces to the ground, and lick the dust at your feet. And you will know that I am Yahweh; those who 
hope in me will not be disappointed. 

Isa 49:24 Can the body be snatched from the warrior, can the tyrant’s captive be set free? 

Isa 49:25 But thus says Yahweh: The warrior’s captive will indeed be snatched away and the tyrant’s booty will 
indeed be set free; I myself shall fight those who fight you and I myself shall save your children. 

Isa 49:26 I shall make your oppressors eat their own flesh, they will be as drunk on their own blood as on new 
wine. And all humanity will know that I am Yahweh, your Saviour, your redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. 

Isa 50:1 Thus says Yahweh: Where is your mother’s writ of divorce by which I repudiated her? Or to which of 
my creditors have I sold you? Look, you have been sold for your own misdeeds, your mother was repudiated for 
your acts of rebellion. 

Isa 50:2 Why was there no one there when I came? Why did no one answer when I called? Is my hand too short 
to redeem? Have I not strength to save? Look, with a threat I can dry the sea, and turn rivers to desert; the fish 
in them go rotten for want of water and die of thirst. 

Isa 50:3 I dress the heavens in black, I cover them in sackcloth. 

Isa 50:4 Lord Yahweh has given me a disciple’s tongue, for me to know how to give a word of comfort to the 
weary. Morning by morning he makes my ear alert to listen like a disciple. 

Isa 50:5 Lord Yahweh has opened my ear and I have not resisted, I have not turned away. 

Isa 50:6 I have offered my back to those who struck me, my cheeks to those who plucked my beard; I have not 
turned my face away from insult and spitting. 

Isa 50:7 Lord Yahweh comes to my help, this is why insult has not touched me, this is why I have set my face 
like flint and know that I shall not be put to shame. 

Isa 50:8 He who grants me saving justice is near! Who will bring a case against me? Let us appear in court 
together! Who has a case against me? Let him approach me! 

Isa 50:9 Look, Lord Yahweh is coming to my help! Who dares condemn me? Look at them, all falling apart like 
moth-eaten clothes! 

Isa 50:10 Which of you fears Yahweh and listens to his servant’s voice? Which of you walks in darkness and 
sees no light? Let him trust in the name of Yahweh and lean on his God! 

Isa 50:1 1 Look, all you who light a fire and arm yourselves with firebrands, walk by the light of your fire and the 
firebrands you have kindled! This is what you will get from me: you will lie down in torment! 

Isa 51:1 Listen to me, you who pursue saving justice, you who seek Yahweh. Consider the rock from which you 
were hewn, the quarry from which you were dug. 



Isa 51 :2 Consider Abraham your father and Sarah who gave you birth. When I called him he was the only one 
but I blessed him and made him numerous. 

Isa 51 :3 Yes, Yahweh has pity on Zion, has pity on all her ruins; he will turn her desert into an Eden and her 
wastelands into the garden of Yahweh. Joy and gladness will be found in her, thanksgiving and the sound of 
music. 

Isa 51 :4 Pay attention to me, my people, listen to me, my nation, for a law will come from me, and I shall make 
my saving justice the light of peoples. 

Isa 51 :5 My justice is suddenly approaching, my salvation appears, my arm is about to judge the peoples. The 
coasts and islands will put their hope in me and put their trust in my arm. 

Isa 51 :6 Raise your eyes to the heavens, look down at the earth; for the heavens will vanish like smoke, the 
earth wear out like clothing and its inhabitants die like vermin, but my salvation will last for ever and my saving 
justice remain inviolable. 

Isa 51 :7 Listen to me, you who know what saving justice means, a people who take my laws to heart: do not 
fear people’s taunts, do not be alarmed by their insults, 

Isa 51 :8 for the moth will eat them like clothing, the grub will devour them like wool, but my saving justice will 
last for ever and my salvation for all generations. 

Isa 51 :9 Awake, awake! Clothe yourself in strength, arm of Yahweh. Awake, as in the olden days, generations 
long ago! Was it not you who split Rahab in half, who pierced the Dragon through? 

Isa 51:10 Was it not you who dried up the sea, the waters of the great Abyss; who made the sea-bed into a road 
for the redeemed to go across? 

Isa 51:11 This is why those whom Yahweh has ransomed will return, they will enter Zion shouting for joy, their 
heads crowned with a joy unending; joy and gladness will escort them and sorrow and sighing will take flight. 

Isa 51:12 I, I am your consoler. Why then should you be afraid of mortal human beings, of a child of man, whose 
fate is that of the grass? 

Isa 51 : 1 3 You forget about Yahweh your Creator who spread out the heavens and laid the earth’s foundations; 
you have never stopped trembling all day long before the fury of the oppressor when he was bent on destruction. 
Where is the oppressor’s fury now? 

Isa 51:14 The despairing captive is soon to be set free; he will not die in the dungeon, nor will his food run out. 
Isa 51 :1 5 I am Yahweh your God who stirs up the sea, making its waves roar — Yahweh Sabaoth is my name. 
Isa 51 :16 I put my words into your mouth, I hid you in the shadow of my hand, to spread out the heavens and 
lay the earth’s foundations and say to Zion, “You are my people”. 

Isa 51:17 Awake, awake! To your feet, Jerusalem! You who from Yahweh’s hand have drunk the cup of his 
wrath. The chalice, the stupefying cup, you have drained to the dregs. 

Isa 51:18 There is no one to guide her of all the children she has borne, no one to grasp her hand of all the 
children she has reared. 

Isa 51:19 Double disaster has befallen you — who is there to sympathise? Pillage and ruin, famine and sword — 
who is there to console you? 

Isa 51 :20 Your children are lying helpless at the end of every street like an antelope trapped in a net; they are 
filled to the brim with Yahweh’s wrath, with the rebuke of your God. 

Isa 51 :21 So listen to this, afflicted one, drunk, though not with wine. 

Isa 51 :22 Thus says your Lord Yahweh, your God, defender of your people: Look, I am taking the stupefying 
cup from your hand, the chalice, the cup of my wrath, you will not have to drink again. 

Isa 51 :23 I shall hand it to your tormentors who used to say to you, “On the ground! So that we can walk over 
you!”. And you would flatten your back like the ground, like a street for them to walk on. 

Isa 52:1 Awake, awake! Clothe yourself in strength, Zion. Put on your finest clothes, Jerusalem, Holy City; for 
the uncircumcised and the unclean will enter you no more. 

Isa 52:2 Shake off your dust; get up, captive Jerusalem! The chains have fallen from your neck, captive 
daughter of Jerusalem! 

Isa 52:3 For Yahweh says this, “You were sold for nothing; you will be redeemed without money”. 

Isa 52:4 For the Lord Yahweh says this, “Long ago my people went to Egypt and settled there as aliens; finally 
Assyria oppressed them for no reason. 

Isa 52:5 So now what is to be done”, declares Yahweh, “since my people have been carried off for nothing, their 
masters howl in triumph”, declares Yahweh, “and my name is held in contempt all day, every day? 

Isa 52:6 Because of this my people will know my name, because of this they will know when the day comes, 
that it is I saying, Here I am!”. 

Isa 52:7 How beautiful on the mountains, are the feet of the messenger announcing peace, of the messenger of 
good news, who proclaims salvation and says to Zion, “Your God is king!”. 

Isa 52:8 The voices of your watchmen! Now they raise their voices, shouting for joy together, for with their own 
eyes they have seen Yahweh returning to Zion. 



Isa 52:9 Break into shouts together, shouts of joy, you ruins of Jerusalem; for Yahweh has consoled his people, 
he has redeemed Jerusalem. 

Isa 52:10 Yahweh has bared his holy arm for all the nations to see, and all the ends of the earth have seen the 
salvation of our God. 

Isa 52:1 1 Go away, go away, leave that place, do not touch anything unclean. Get out of her, purify yourselves, 
you who carry Yahweh’s vessels! 

Isa 52:12 For you are not to hurry away, you are not to leave like fugitives. No, Yahweh marches at your head 
and the God of Israel is your rearguard. 

Isa 52:13 Look, my servant will prosper, will grow great, will rise to great heights. 

Isa 52:14 As many people were aghast at him — he was so inhumanly disfigured that he no longer looked like a 
man- 

Isa 52:15 so many nations will be astonished and kings will stay tight-lipped before him, seeing what had never 
been told them, learning what they had not heard before. 

Isa 53:1 Who has given credence to what we have heard? And who has seen in it a revelation of Yahweh’s 
arm? 

Isa 53:2 Like a sapling he grew up before him, like a root in arid ground. He had no form or charm to attract us, 
no beauty to win our hearts; 

Isa 53:3 he was despised, the lowest of men, a man of sorrows, familiar with suffering, one from whom, as it 
were, we averted our gaze, despised, for whom we had no regard. 

Isa 53:4 Yet ours were the sufferings he was bearing, ours the sorrows he was carrying, while we thought of him 
as someöne being punished and struck with affliction by God; 

Isa 53:5 whereäs he was being wounded for our rebellions, crushed because of our guilt; the punishment 
reconciling us fell on him, and we have been healed by his bruises. 

Isa 53:6 We had all gone astray like sheep, each taking his own way, and Yahweh brought the acts of rebellion 
of all of us to bear on him. 

Isa 53:7 Ill-treated and afflicted, he never opened his mouth, like a lamb led to the slaughter-house, like a sheep 
dumb before its shearers he never opened his mouth. 

Isa 53:8 Forcibly, after sentence, he was taken. Which of his contemporaries was concerned at his having been 
cut off from the land of the living, at his having been struck dead for his people’s rebellion? 

Isa 53:9 He was given a grave with the wicked, and his tomb is with the rich, although he had done no violence, 
had spoken no deceit. 

Isa 53:10 It was Yahweh’s good pleasure to crush him with pain; if he gives his life as a sin offering, he will see 
his offspring and prolong his life, and through him Yahweh’s good pleasure will be done. 

Isa 53:1 1 After the ordeal he has endured, he will see the light and be content. By his knowledge, the upright 
one, my servant will justify many by taking their guilt on himself. 

Isa 53:12 Hence I shall give him a portion with the many, and he will share the booty with the mighty, for having 
exposed himself to death and for being counted as one of the rebellious, whereäs he was bearing the sin of 
many and interceding for the rebellious. 

Isa 54:1 Shout for joy, barren one who has borne no children! Break into cries and shouts of joy, you who were 
never in labour! For the children of the forsaken one are more in number than the children of the wedded wife, 
says Yahweh. 

Isa 54:2 Widen the space of your tent, extend the curtains of your home, do not hold back! Lengthen your ropes, 
make your tent-pegs firm, 

Isa 54:3 for you will burst out to right and to left, your race will dispossess the nations and repopulate deserted 
towns. 

Isa 54:4 Do not fear, you will not be put to shame again, do not worry, you will not be disgraced again; for you 
will forget the shame of your youth and no longer remember the dishonour of your widowhood. 

Isa 54:5 For your Creator is your husband, Yahweh Sabaoth is his name, the Holy One of Israel is your 
redeemer, he is called God of the whole world. 

Isa 54:6 Yes, Yahweh has called you back like a forsaken, grief-stricken wife, like the repudiated wife of his 
youth, says your God. 

Isa 54:7 I did forsake you for a brief moment, but in great compassion I shall take you back. 

Isa 54:8 In a flood of anger, for a moment I hid my face from you. But in everlasting love I have taken pity on 
you, says Yahweh, your redeemer. 

Isa 54:9 For me it will be as in the days of Noah when I swore that Noah’s waters should never flood the world 
again. So now I swear never to be angry with you and never to rebuke you again. 

Isa 54:10 For the mountains may go away and the hills may totter, but my faithful love will never leave you, my 
covenant of peace will never totter, says Yahweh who takes pity on you. 

Isa 54:1 1 Unhappy creature, storm-tossed, unpitied, look, I shall lay your stones on agates and your foundations 



on sapphires. 

Isa 54:12 I shall make your battlements rubies, your gateways firestone and your entire wall precious stones. 

Isa 54:13 All your children will be taught by Yahweh and great will be your children’s prosperity. 

Isa 54:14 In saving justice you will be made firm, free from oppression: you will have nothing to fear; free from 
terror: it will not approach you. 

Isa 54:15 Should anyone attack you, that will not be my doing, and whoëver does attack you, for your sake will 
fall. 

Isa 54:16 I created the smith who blows on the charcoal-fire to produce a weapon for his use; I also created the 
destroyer to ruin it. 

Isa 54:17 No weapon forged against you will succeed. Any voice raised against you in court you will refute. 

Such is the lot of the servants of Yahweh, the saving justice I assure them, declares Yahweh. 

Isa 55:1 Oh, come to the water all you who are thirsty; though you have no money, come! Buy and eat; come, 
buy wine and milk without money, free! 

Isa 55:2 Why spend money on what cannot nourish and your wages on what fails to satisfy? Listen carefully to 
me, and you will have good things to eat and rich food to enjoy. 

Isa 55:3 Pay attention, come to me; listen, and you will live. I shall make an everlasting covenant with you in 
fulfilment of the favours promised to David. 

Isa 55:4 Look, I have made him a witness to peoples, a leader and lawgiver to peoples. 

Isa 55:5 Look, you will summon a nation unknown to you, a nation unknown to you will hurry to you for the sake 
of Yahweh your God, because the Holy One of Israel has glorified you. 

Isa 55:6 Seek out Yahweh while he is still to be found, call to him while he is still near. 

Isa 55:7 Let the wicked abandon his way and the evil one his thoughts. Let him turn back to Yahweh who will 
take pity on him, to our God, for he is rich in forgiveness; 

Isa 55:8 for my thoughts are not your thoughts and your ways are not my ways, declares Yahweh. 

Isa 55:9 For the heavens are as high above earth as my ways are above your ways, my thoughts above your 
thoughts. 

Isa 55:10 For, as the rain and the snow come down from the sky and do not return before having watered the 
earth, fertilising it and making it germinate to provide seed for the sower and food to eat, 

Isa 55:1 1 so it is with the word that goes from my mouth: it will not return to me unfulfilled or before having 
carried out my good pleasure and having achieved what it was sent to do. 

Isa 55:12 Yes, you will go out with joy and be led away in safety. Mountains and hills will break into joyful cries 
before you and all the trees of the countryside clap their hands. 

Isa 55:13 Cypress will grow instead of thorns, myrtle instead of nettles. And this will be fame for Yahweh, an 
eternal monument never to be effaced. 

Isa 56:1 Thus says Yahweh: Make fair judgement your concern, act with justice, for soon my salvation will come 
and my saving justice be manifest. 

Isa 56:2 Blessed is anyone who does this, anyone who clings to it, observing the Sabbath, not profaning it, and 
abstaining from every evil deed. 

Isa 56:3 No foreigner adhering to Yahweh should say, “Yahweh will utterly exclude me from his people”. No 
eunuch should say, “Look, I am a dried-up tree”. 

Isa 56:4 For Yahweh says this: To the eunuchs who observe my Sabbaths and choose to do my good pleasure 
and cling to my covenant, 

Isa 56:5 I shall give them in my house and within my walls a monument and a name better than sons and 
daughters; I shall give them an everlasting name that will never be effaced. 

Isa 56:6 As for foreigners who adhere to Yahweh to serve him, to love Yahweh’s name and become his 
servants, all who observe the Sabbath, not profaning it, and cling to my covenant: 

Isa 56:7 these I shall lead to my holy mountain and make them joyful in my house of prayer. Their burnt 
offerings and sacrifices will be accepted on my altar, for my house will be called a house of prayer for all 
peoples. 

Isa 56:8 Lord Yahweh who gathers the exiles of Israel declares: There are others I shall gather besides those 
already gathered. 

Isa 56:9 Come and gorge, all you wild beasts, all you beasts of the forest! 

Isa 56:10 Its watchmen are all blind, they know nothing. Dumb watchdogs all, unable to bark, they dream, lie 
down, and love to sleep. 

Isa 56:1 1 Greedy dogs, never satisfied, such are the shepherds, who understand nothing; they all go their own 
way, each to the last man after his own interest. 

Isa 56:12 “Come, let me fetch wine; we will get drunk on strong drink, tomorrow will be just as wonderful as 
today and even more so!”. 

Isa 57:1 The upright person perishes and no one cares. The faithful is taken off and no one takes it to heart. 



Yes, because of the evil times the upright is taken off; 

Isa 57:2 he will enter peace, and those who follow the right way will find rest on their beds. 

Isa 57:3 But you, you children of a witch, come here, adulterous race prostituting yourselves! 

Isa 57:4 At whom are you jeering, at whom are you making faces and sticking out your tongue? Are you not the 
spawn of rebellion, a lying race? 

Isa 57:5 Lusting among the terebinths, and under every spreading tree, sacrificing children in the ravines, below 
the clefts in the rocks. 

Isa 57:6 The smooth stones of the ravines will be your portion, yes, these will be your lot. To these you have 
poured libations, have brought your cereal offering. Can all this appease me? 

Isa 57:7 On a mountain high and lofty you have put your bed. Thither, too, you have climbed to offer sacrifice. 
Isa 57:8 Behind door and doorpost you have set your reminder. Yes, far from me, you exposed yourself, 
climbed on to your bed, and made the most of it. You struck a profitable bargain with those whose bed you love, 
whoring with them often, with your eyes on the sacred symbol. 

Isa 57:9 You went to Molech with oil, you were prodigal with your perfumes; you sent your envoys far afield, 
down to Sheol itself. 

Isa 57:10 Though tired by so much travelling, you never said, “It is no use”. Finding your strength revive, you 
never gave up. 

Isa 57:1 1 Who was it you dreaded, and feared, that you should betray me, no longer remember me and not 
spare a thought for me? Was I not silent for a long time? So you cannot have been afraid of me. 

Isa 57:12 Now I shall expose this uprightness of yours, and little good it did you. 

Isa 57:13 When you cry for help, let those thronging round you save you! The wind will carry them all away, one 
puff will take them off. But whoëver trusts in me will inherit the country, he will own my holy mountain. 

Isa 57:14 Then it will be said: Level up, level up, clear the way, remove the obstacle from my people’s way, 

Isa 57:15 for thus says the High and Exalted One who lives eternally and whose name is holy, “I live in the holy 
heights but I am with the contrite and humble, to revive the spirit of the humble, to revive the heart of the contrite. 
Isa 57:16 “For I do not want to be forever accusing nor always to be angry, or the spirit would fail under my 
onslaught, the souls that I myself have made. 

Isa 57:17 “Angered by his wicked cupidity, I hid and struck him in anger, but he rebelliously went the way of his 
choice. 

Isa 57:18 “I saw how he behaved, but I shall heal him, I shall lead him, fill him with consolation, him and those 
who mourn for him, 

Isa 57:19 bringing praise to their lips. Peace, peace to far and near, Yahweh says, and I shall heal him”. 

Isa 57:20 The wicked, however, are like the restless sea that cannot be still, whose waters throw up mud and 
dirt. 

Isa 57:21 “No peace”, says Yahweh, “for the wicked”. 

Isa 58:1 Shout for all you are worth, do not hold back, raise your voice like a trumpet. To my people proclaim 
their rebellious acts, to the House of Jacob, their sins. 

Isa 58:2 They seek for me day after day, they long to know my ways, like a nation that has acted uprightly and 
not forsaken the law of its God. They ask me for laws that are upright, they long to be near God: 

Isa 58:3 “Why have we fasted, if you do not see, why mortify ourselves if you never notice?”. Look, you seek your 
own pleasure on your fastdays and you exploit all your workmen; 

Isa 58:4 look, the only purpose of your fasting is to quarrel and squabble and strike viciously with your fist. 
Fasting like yours today will never make your voice heard on high. 

Isa 58:5 Is that the sort of fast that pleases me, a day when a person inflicts pain on himself? Hanging your 
head like a reed, spreading out sackcloth and ashes? Is that what you call fasting, a day acceptable to Yahweh? 
Isa 58:6 Is not this the sort of fast that pleases me: to break unjust fetters, to undo the thongs of the yoke, to let 
the oppressed go free, and to break all yokes? 

Isa 58:7 Is it not sharing your food with the hungry, and sheltering the homeless poor; if you see someöne 
lacking clothes, to clothe him, and not to turn away from your own kin? 

Isa 58:8 Then your light will blaze out like the dawn and your wound be quickly healed over. Saving justice will 
go ahead of you and Yahweh’s glory come behind you. 

Isa 58:9 Then you will cry for help and Yahweh will answer; you will call and he will say, “I am here”. If you do 
away with the yoke, the clenched fist and malicious words, 

Isa 58:10 if you deprive yourself for the hungry and satisfy the needs of the afflicted, your light will rise in the 
darkness, and your darkest hour will be like noon. 

Isa 58:1 1 Yahweh will always guide you, will satisfy your needs in the scorched land; he will give strength to 
your bones and you will be like a watered garden, like a flowing spring whose waters never run dry. 

Isa 58:12 Your ancient ruins will be rebuilt; you will build on age — old foundations. You will be called ‘Breach- 
mender’, ‘Restorer of streets to be lived in’. 



Isa 58:13 If you refrain from breaking the Sabbath, from taking your own pleasure on my holy day, if you call the 
Sabbath “Delightful”, and the day sacred to Yahweh “Honourable”, if you honour it by abstaining from travel, from 
seeking your own pleasure and from too much talk, 

Isa 58:14 then you will find true happiness in Yahweh, and I shall lead you in triumph over the heights of the 
land. I shall feed you on the heritage of your father Jacob, for the mouth of Yahweh has spoken. 

Isa 59:1 No, the arm of Yahweh is not too short to save, nor his ear too dull to hear, 

Isa 59:2 but your guilty deeds have made a gulf between you and your God. Your sins have made him hide his 
face from you so as not to hear you, 

Isa 59:3 since your hands are stained with blood and your fingers with guilt; your lips utter lies, your tongues 
murmur wickedness. 

Isa 59:4 No one makes upright accusations or pleads sincerely. All rely on empty words, utter falsehood, 
conceive trouble and give birth to evil. 

Isa 59:5 They are hatching adders’ eggs and weaving a spider’s web; eat one of their eggs and you die, crush 
one and a viper emerges. 

Isa 59:6 Their webs are useless for clothing, their deeds are useless for wearing; their deeds are deeds of guilt, 
violence fills their hands. 

Isa 59:7 Their feet run to do evil; they are quick to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of guilt, 
wherever they go there is havoc and ruin. 

Isa 59:8 They do not know the way of peace, there is no fair judgement in their course, they have made their 
own crooked paths, and no one treading them knows any peace. 

Isa 59:9 Thus fair judgement is remote from us nor can uprightness overtake us. We looked for light and all is 
darkness, for brightness and we walk in gloom. 

Isa 59:10 Like the blind we feel our way along walls, we grope our way like people without eyes. We stumble as 
though noon were twilight, among the robust we are like the dead. 

Isa 59:1 1 We growl, all of us, like bears, like doves we make no sound but moaning, waiting for the fair 
judgement that never comes, for salvation, but that is far away. 

Isa 59:12 How often we have rebelled against you and our sins bear witness against us. Our rebellious acts are 
indeed with us, we are well aware of our guilt: 

Isa 59:13 rebellion and denial of Yahweh, turning our back on our God, talking violence and revolt, murmuring 
lies in our heart. 

Isa 59:14 Fair judgement is driven away and saving justice stands aloof, for good faith has stumbled in the 
street and sincerity cannot enter. 

Isa 59:15 Good faith has vanished; anyone abstaining from evil is victimised. Yahweh saw this and was 
displeased that there was no fair judgement. 

Isa 59:16 He saw there was no one and wondered there was no one to intervene. So he made his own arm his 
mainstay, his own saving justice his support. 

Isa 59:17 He put on saving justice like a breastplate, on his head the helmet of salvation. He put on the clothes 
of vengeance like a tunic and wrapped himself in jealousy like a cloak. 

Isa 59:18 To each he repays his due, retribution to his enemies, reprisals on his foes, to the coasts and islands 
he will repay their due. 

Isa 59:19 From the west, Yahweh’s name will be feared, and from the east, his glory, for he will come like a 
pent-up stream impelled by the breath of Yahweh. 

Isa 59:20 Then for Zion will come a redeemer, for those who stop rebelling in Jacob, declares Yahweh. 

Isa 59:21 “For my part, this is my covenant with them, says Yahweh. My spirit with which I endowed you, and 
my words that I have put in your mouth, will not leave your mouth, or the mouths of your children, or the mouths 
of your children’s children, says Yahweh, henceforth and for ever”. 

Isa 60:1 Arise, shine out, for your light has come, and the glory of Yahweh has risen on you. 

Isa 60:2 Look! though night still covers the earth and darkness the peoples, on you Yahweh is rising and over 
you his glory can be seen. 

Isa 60:3 The nations will come to your light and kings to your dawning brightness. 

Isa 60:4 Lift up your eyes and look around: all are assembling and coming towards you, your sons coming from 
far away and your daughters being carried on the hip. 

Isa 60:5 At this sight you will grow radiant, your heart will throb and dilate, since the riches of the sea will flow to 
you, the wealth of the nations come to you; 

Isa 60:6 camels in throngs will fill your streets, the young camels of Midian and Ephah; everyone in Saba will 
come, bringing gold and incense and proclaiming Yahweh’s praises. 

Isa 60:7 All the flocks of Kedar will gather inside you, the rams of Nebaioth will be at your service as acceptable 
victims on my altar, and I shall glorify my glorious house. 

Isa 60:8 Who are these flying like a cloud, like doves to their dovecote? 



Isa 60:9 Why, the coasts and islands put their hope in me and the vessels of Tarshish take the lead in bringing 
your children from far away, and their silver and gold with them, for the sake of the name of Yahweh your God, 
of the Holy One of Israel who has made you glorious. 

Isa 60:10 Foreigners will rebuild your walls and their kings will serve you. For though I struck you in anger, in 
mercy I have pitied you. 

Isa 60:1 1 Your gates will always be open, never closed, either day or night, for the riches of the nations to be 
brought you and their kings to be let in. 

Isa 60:12 For the nation and kingdom that will not serve you will perish, and the nations will be utterly destroyed. 
Isa 60:13 The glory of the Lebanon will come to you, cypress, plane-tree, box-tree, one and all, to adorn the site 
of my sanctuary, for me to honour the place where I stand. 

Isa 60:14 Your oppressors’ children will humbly approach you, at your feet all who despised you will fall 
addressing you as ‘City of Yahweh’, ‘Zion of the Holy One of Israel’. 

Isa 60:15 Instead of your being forsaken and hated, avoided by everyone, I will make you an object of eternal 
pride, a source of joy from age to age. 

Isa 60:16 You will suck the milk of nations, you will suck the wealth of kings, and you will know that I, Yahweh, 
am your Saviour, that your redeemer is the Mighty One of Jacob. 

Isa 60:17 For bronze I shall bring gold and for iron I shall bring silver, and for wood, bronze, and for stone, iron; I 
shall make Peace your administration and Saving Justice your government. 

Isa 60:18 Violence will no longer be heard of in your country, nor devastation and ruin within your frontiers. You 
will call your walls ‘Salvation’ and your gates ‘Praise’. 

Isa 60:19 No more will the sun give you daylight, nor moonlight shine on you, but Yahweh will be your 
everlasting light, your God will be your splendour. 

Isa 60:20 Your sun will set no more nor will your moon wane, for Yahweh will be your everlasting light and your 
days of mourning will be over. 

Isa 60:21 Your people, all of them upright, will possess the country for ever, the shoot I myself have planted, my 
handiwork, for my own glory. 

Isa 60:22 The smallest will grow into a thousand, the weakest one into a mighty nation. When the time is ripe, I, 
Yahweh, shall quickly bring it about. 

Isa 61:1 The spirit of Lord Yahweh is on me for Yahweh has anointed me. He has sent me to bring the news to 
the afflicted, to soothe the broken-hearted, 

Isa 61 :2 to proclaim liberty to captives, release to those in prison, to proclaim a year of favour from Yahweh and 
a day of vengeance for our God, to comfort all who mourn 

Isa 61 :3 (to give to Zion’s mourners), to give them for ashes a garland, for mourning-dress, the oil of gladness, 
for despondency, festal attire; and they will be called “terebinths of saving justice”, planted by Yahweh to glorify 
him. 

Isa 61:4 They will rebuild the ancient ruins, they will raise what has long lain waste, they will restore the ruined 
cities, all that has lain waste for ages past. 

Isa 61 :5 Strangers will come forward to feed your flocks, foreigners be your ploughmen and vinedressers; 

Isa 61 :6 but you will be called ‘priests of Yahweh’ and be addressed as ‘ministers of our God’. You will feed on 
the wealth of nations, you will supplant them in their glory. 

Isa 61:7 To make up for your shame, you will receive double; instead of disgrace, shouts of joy will be their lot; 
yes, they will have a double portion in their country and everlasting joy will be theirs. 

Isa 61:8 For I am Yahweh: I love fair judgement, I hate robbery and wrong-doing, and I shall reward them 
faithfully and make an everlasting covenant with them. 

Isa 61 :9 Their race will be famous throughout the nations and their offspring throughout the peoples. All who 
see them will admit that they are a race whom Yahweh has blessed. 

Isa 61:10 I exult for joy in Yahweh, my soul rejoices in my God, for he has clothed me in garments of salvation, 
he has wrapped me in a cloak of saving justice, like a bridegroom wearing his garland, like a bride adorned in 
her jewels. 

Isa 61:11 For as the earth sends up its shoots and a garden makes seeds sprout, so Lord Yahweh makes 
saving justice and praise spring up in the sight of all nations. 

Isa 62:1 About Zion I will not be silent, about Jerusalem I shall not rest until saving justice dawns for her like a 
bright light and her salvation like a blazing torch. 

Isa 62:2 The nations will then see your saving justice, and all kings your glory, and you will be called a new 
name which Yahweh’s mouth will reveal. 

Isa 62:3 You will be a crown of splendour in Yahweh’s hand, a princely diadem in the hand of your God. 

Isa 62:4 No more will you be known as “Forsaken” or your country be known as “Desolation”; instead, you will be 
called “My Delight is in her” and your country “The Wedded”; for Yahweh will take delight in you and your country 
will have its wedding. 



Isa 62:5 Like a young man marrying a virgin, your rebuilder will wed you, and as the bridegroom rejoices in his 
bride, so will your God rejoice in you. 

Isa 62:6 On your walls, Jerusalem, I have posted watchmen; they will never fall silent, day or night. No peace for 
you, as you keep Yahweh’s attention! 

Isa 62:7 And give him no peace either until he restores Jerusalem and makes her the pride of the world! 

Isa 62:8 Yahweh has sworn by his right hand and by his mighty arm: Never again shall I give your grain to feed 
your enemies. Never again will foreigners drink the wine for which you have toiled. 

Isa 62:9 No, the reapers will eat it and praise Yahweh, the harvesters will drink it in my sacred courts! 

Isa 62:10 Pass through, pass through the gates. Clear a way for my people! Level up, level up the highway, 
remove the stones! Hoist a signal to the peoples! 

Isa 62:1 1 This is what Yahweh has proclaimed to the remotest part of earth: Say to the daughter of Zion, “Look, 
your salvation is coming; with him comes his reward, his achievement precedes him!”. 

Isa 62:12 They will be called ‘The Holy People’, ‘Yahweh’s Redeemed’, while you will be called ‘Sought-after’, 
‘City-not-forsaken’. 

Isa 63:1 Who is this coming from Edom, from Bozrah in crimson garments, so magnificently dressed, marching 
so full of strength? - It is I, whose word is saving justice, whose power is to save. 

Isa 63:2 -Why are your garments red, your clothes like someöne treading the winepress? 

Isa 63:3 -I have trodden the winepress alone; of my people, not one was with me. So I trod them down in my 
anger, I trampled on them in my wrath. Their blood squirted over my garments and all my clothes are stained. 

Isa 63:4 For I have decided on a day of vengeance, my year of retribution has come. 

Isa 63:5 I looked: there was no one to help me; I was appalled but could find no supporter! Then my own arm 
came to my rescue and my own fury supported me. 

Isa 63:6 I crushed the peoples in my anger, I shattered them in my fury and sent their blood streaming to the 
ground. 

Isa 63:7 I shall recount Yahweh’s acts of faithful love, Yahweh’s praises, in return for all that Yahweh has done 
for us, for his great kindness to the House of Israel, for all that he has done in his mercy, for the abundance of 
his acts of faithful love. 

Isa 63:8 For he said, “Truly they are my people, children who will not betray me”, and he became their Saviour. 
Isa 63:9 In all their troubles, it was no messenger or angel but his presence that saved them. In his love and pity 
he himself redeemed them, lifted them up and carried them throughout the days of old. 

Isa 63:10 But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit. Then he became their enemy and himself waged war on 
them. 

Isa 63:1 1 But he called the past to mind, Moses his servant. Where is he who saved them from the sea, the 
Shepherd of his flock? Where was he who put his holy Spirit among them, 

Isa 63:12 whose glorious arm led the way by Moses’ right hand? Who divided the waters before them to win 
himself everlasting renown, 

Isa 63:13 who led them through the depths as easily as a horse through the desert? They stumbled as little 
Isa 63:14 as cattle going down to the plain. Yahweh’s Spirit led them to rest. This was how you guided your 
people to win yourself glorious renown. 

Isa 63:15 Look down from heaven and see from your holy and glorious dwelling. Where is your zeal and your 
might? Are your deepest feelings, your mercy to me, to be restrained? 

Isa 63:16 After all, you are our Father. If Abraham will not own us, if Israel will not acknowledge us, you, 

Yahweh, are our Father, “Our Redeemer” is your name from of old. 

Isa 63:17 Why, Yahweh, do you let us wander from your ways and let our hearts grow too hard to fear you? 
Return, for the sake of your servants, the tribes of your heritage. 

Isa 63:18 Your holy people have owned it for so short a time, our enemies have trampled on your sanctuary. 

Isa 63:19 We have long been like those you do not rule, people who do not bear your name. Oh, that you would 
tear the heavens open and come down — in your presence the mountains would quake, 

Isa 64:1 as fire sets brushwood alight, as fire makes water boil — to make your name known to your foes; the 
nations would tremble at your presence, 

Isa 64:2 at the unexpected miracles you would do. (Oh, that you would come down, in your presence the 
mountains would quake!) 

Isa 64:3 Never has anyone heard, no ear has heard, no eye has seen any god but you act like this for the sake 
of those who trust him. 

Isa 64:4 You come to meet those who are happy to act uprightly; keeping your ways reminds them of you. Yes, 
you have been angry and we have been sinners; now we persist in your ways and we shall be saved. 

Isa 64:5 We have all been like unclean things and our upright deeds like filthy rags. We wither, all of us, like 
leaves, and all our misdeeds carry us off like the wind. 

Isa 64:6 There is no one to invoke your name, to rouse himself to hold fast to you, for you have hidden your face 



from us and given us up to the power of our misdeeds. 

Isa 64:7 And yet, Yahweh, you are our Father; we the clay and you our potter, all of us are the work of your 
hands. 

Isa 64:8 Yahweh, do not let your anger go too far and do not remember guilt for ever. Look, please, we are all 
your people; 

Isa 64:9 your holy cities have become a desert, Zion has become a desert, Jerusalem a wasteland. 

Isa 64:10 Our holy and glorious Temple, in which our ancestors used to praise you, has been burnt to the 
ground; all our delight lies in ruins. 

Isa 64:1 1 Yahweh, can you restrain yourself at all this? Will you stay silent and afflict us beyond endurance? 

Isa 65:1 I have let myself be approached by those who did not consult me, I have let myself be found by those 
who did not seek me. I said, “Here I am, here I am!”. to a nation that did not invoke my name. 

Isa 65:2 Each day I stretched out my hands to a rebellious people who follow a way which is not good, as the 
fancy takes them; 

Isa 65:3 a people constantly provoking me to my face by sacrificing in gardens, burning incense on bricks, 

Isa 65:4 living in tombs, spending the night in dark corners, eating the meat of pigs, putting unclean foods on 
their plates. 

Isa 65:5 “Keep your distance”, they say, “do not touch me, lest my sanctity come near you!”. Such words are like 
stifling smoke to me, an ever-burning fire. 

Isa 65:6 Look, it is inscribed before me: I shall not be silent until I have repaid them, repaid them in full, 

Isa 65:7 punished your guilt and your ancestors’ guilt together, Yahweh declares. For having burnt incense on 
the mountains and insulted me on the hills, I shall pay them back in full for what they have done. 

Isa 65:8 Yahweh says this: As when a bunch of grapes is found still to have juice in it, people say, “Do not 
destroy it, for it contains a blessing”, so I shall act for my servants’ sake, I shall not destroy them all. 

Isa 65:9 I shall produce descendants from Jacob and heirs to my mountains from Judah, my chosen ones will 
own them and my servants will live there. 

Isa 65:10 Sharon will be a pasture for flocks, the Valley of Achor a feeding ground for cattle, for those of my 
people who have sought me. 

Isa 65:1 1 But as for those of you who abandon Yahweh, who forget my holy mountain, who lay the table for 
Gad, who fill cups of mixed wine for Meni, 

Isa 65:12 you I shall destine to the sword and all of you will stoop to be slaughtered, because I called and you 
would not answer, I spoke and you would not listen; you have done what I consider evil, you chose to do what 
displeases me. 

Isa 65:13 Therefore Lord Yahweh says this: You will see my servants eating while you go hungry; you will see 
my servants drinking while you go thirsty; you will see my servants rejoicing while you are put to shame; 

Isa 65:14 you will hear my servants shouting for joy of heart, while you shriek for sorrow of heart and howl with a 
broken spirit. 

Isa 65:15 And you will leave your name behind as a curse for my chosen ones, “May Lord Yahweh strike you 
dead!”. But to his servants he will give another name. 

Isa 65:16 Whoëver blesses himself on earth will bless himself by the God of truth, and whoëver swears an oath 
on earth will swear by the God of truth, for past troubles will be forgotten and hidden from my eyes. 

Isa 65:17 For look, I am going to create new heavens and a new earth, and the past will not be remembered 
and will come no more to mind. 

Isa 65:18 Rather be joyful, be glad for ever at what I am creating, for look, I am creating Jerusalem to be “Joy” 
and my people to be “Gladness'. 

Isa 65:19 I shall be joyful in Jerusalem and I shall rejoice in my people. No more will the sound of weeping be 
heard there, nor the sound of a shriek; 

Isa 65:20 never again will there be an infant there who lives only a few days, nor an old man who does not run 
his full course; for the youngest will die at a hundred, and at a hundred the sinner will be accursed. 

Isa 65:21 They will build houses and live in them, they will plant vineyards and eat their fruit. 

Isa 65:22 They will not build for others to live in, or plant for others to eat; for the days of my people will be like 
the days of a tree, and my chosen ones will themselves use what they have made. 

Isa 65:23 They will not toil in vain, nor bear children destined to disaster, for they are the race of Yahweh’s 
blessed ones and so are their offspring. 

Isa 65:24 Thus, before they call I shall answer, before they stop speaking I shall have heard. 

Isa 65:25 The wolf and the young lamb will feed together, the lion will eat hay like the ox, and dust be the 
serpent’s food. No hurt, no harm will be done on all my holy mountain, Yahweh says. 

Isa 66:1 Thus says Yahweh: With heaven my throne and earth my footstool, what house could you build me, 
what place for me to rest, 

Isa 66:2 when all these things were made by me and all belong to me? - declares Yahweh. But my eyes are 



drawn to the person of humbled and contrite spirit, who trembles at my word. 

Isa 66:3 Some slaughter a bull, some kill a human being, some sacrifice a lamb, some strangle a dog, some 
present an offering of pig’s blood, some burn memorial incense, a revolting blessing; all these people have 
chosen their own ways and take delight in their disgusting practices. 

Isa 66:4 I too take delight in making fools of them, I shall bring what they most fear down on them because I 
have called and no one would answer, I spoke and no one listened. They have done what I regard as evil, have 
chosen what displeases me. 

Isa 66:5 Listen to the word of Yahweh, you who tremble at his word. Your brothers, who hate and reject you 
because of my name, have said, “Let Yahweh show his glory, let us witness your joy!”. But they will be put to 
shame. 

Isa 66:6 Listen! An uproar from the city! A voice from the Temple! The voice of Yahweh bringing retribution on 
his enemies. 

Isa 66:7 Before being in labour she has given birth. Before the birth pangs came, she has been delivered of a 
child. 

Isa 66:8 Who ever heard of such a thing, who ever saw anything like this? Can a country be born in one day? 
Can a nation be brought forth all at once? For Zion, scarcely in labour, has brought forth her children! 

Isa 66:9 Shall I open the womb and not bring to birth? says Yahweh. Shall I, who bring to birth, close the womb? 
says your God. 

Isa 66:10 Rejoice with Jerusalem, be glad for her, all you who love her! Rejoice, rejoice with her, all you who 
mourned her! 

Isa 66:1 1 So that you may be suckled and satisfied from her consoling breast, so that you may drink deep with 
delight from her generous nipple. 

Isa 66:12 For Yahweh says this: Look, I am going to send peace flowing over her like a river, and like a stream 
in spate the glory of the nations. You will be suckled, carried on her hip and fondled in her lap. 

Isa 66:13 As a mother comforts a child, so I shall comfort you; you will be comforted in Jerusalem. 

Isa 66:14 At the sight your heart will rejoice, and your limbs regain vigour like the grass. To his servants Yahweh 
will reveal his hand, but to his enemies his fury. 

Isa 66:15 For see how Yahweh comes in fire, his chariots like the whirlwind, to assuage his anger with burning, 
his rebukes with flaming fire. 

Isa 66:16 For by fire will Yahweh execute fair judgement, and by his sword, on all people; and Yahweh’s victims 
will be many. 

Isa 66:17 As for those who sanctify themselves and purify themselves to enter the gardens, following the one in 
the centre, who eat the flesh of pigs, revolting things and rats: their deeds and their thoughts will perish together, 
declares Yahweh. 

Isa 66:18 I am coming to gather every nation and every language. They will come to witness my glory. 

Isa 66:19 I shall give them a sign and send some of their survivors to the nations: to Tarshish, Put, Lud, 
Meshech, Tubal and Javan, to the distant coasts and islands that have never heard of me or seen my glory. 

They will proclaim my glory to the nations, 

Isa 66:20 and from all the nations they will bring all your brothers as an offering to Yahweh, on horses, in 
chariots, in litters, on mules and on camels, to my holy mountain, Jerusalem, Yahweh says, like Israelites 
bringing offerings in clean vessels to Yahweh’s house. 

Isa 66:21 And some of them I shall make into priests and Levites, Yahweh says. 

Isa 66:22 For as the new heavens and the new earth I am making will endure before me, declares Yahweh, so 
will your race and your name endure. 

Isa 66:23 From New Moon to New Moon, from Sabbath to Sabbath, all humanity will come and bow in my 
presence, Yahweh says. 

Isa 66:24 And on their way out they will see the corpses of those who rebelled against me; for their worm will 
never die nor their fire be put out, and they will be held in horror by all humanity. 

Jer 1:1 The words of Jeremiah son of Hilkiah, one of the priests living at Anathoth in the territory of Benjamin. 

Jer 1 :2 The word of Yahweh came to him in the days of Josiah son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth 
year of his reign; 

Jer 1 :3 then in the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah 
son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the deportation of Jerusalem, in the fifth month. 

Jer 1 :4 The word of Yahweh came to me, saying: 

Jer 1 :5 “Before I formed you in the womb I knew you; before you came to birth I consecrated you; I appointed 
you as prophet to the nations”. 

Jer 1 :6 I then said, “Ah, ah, ah, Lord Yahweh; you see, I do not know how to speak: I am only a child!”. 

Jer 1 :7 But Yahweh replied, “Do not say, ‘I am only a child,” for you must go to all to whom I send you and say 
whatever I command you. 



Jer 1 :8 Do not be afraid of confronting them, for I am with you to rescue you, Yahweh declares”. 

Jer 1 :9 Then Yahweh stretched out his hand and touched my mouth, and Yahweh said to me: “There! I have put 
my words into your mouth. 

Jer 1:10 Look, today I have set you over the nations and kingdoms, to uproot and to knock down, to destroy and 
to overthrow, to build and to plant”. 

Jer 1:11 The word of Yahweh came to me, asking, “Jeremiah, what do you see?”. I answered, “I see a branch of 
the Watchful Tree”. 

Jer 1:12 Then Yahweh said, “Well seen, for I am watching over my word to perform it”. 

Jer 1:13 A second time the word of Yahweh came to me, asking, “What do you see?”. I answered, “I see a 

cooking pot on the boil, with its mouth tilting from the north”. 

Jer 1:14 Then Yahweh said: “From the north disaster will come boiling over on all who live in the country, 

Jer 1:15 for I am now summoning all the families of the kingdoms of the north, Yahweh declares. They will 
come, and each will set his throne in front of the gates of Jerusalem, all round, against its walls and against all 
the towns of Judah. 

Jer 1:16 I shall pronounce my judgements on them because of all their wickedness, since they have abandoned 
me, offering incense to other gods and worshipping what their own hands have made. 

Jer 1:17 “As for you, prepare yourself for action. Stand up and tell them all I command you. Have no fear of 
them and in their presence I will make you fearless. 

Jer 1:18 For look, today I have made you into a fortified city, a pillar of iron, a wall of bronze to stand against the 

whole country: the kings of Judah, its princes, its priests and the people of the country. 

Jer 1:19 They will fight against you but will not overcome you, for I am with you, Yahweh declares, to rescue 
you”. 

Jer 2:1 The word of Yahweh came to me, saying, 

Jer 2:2 “Go and shout this in Jerusalem’s ears: “Yahweh says this: ‘I remember your faithful love, the affection of 
your bridal days, when you followed me through the desert, through a land unsown. 

Jer 2:3 Israel was sacred to Yahweh; the first-fruits of his harvest; all who ate this incurred guilt, disaster befell 
them, Yahweh declares’”. 

Jer 2:4 Listen to Yahweh’s word, House of Jacob and all the families of the House of Israel. 

Jer 2:5 Yahweh says this, “What did your ancestors find wrong in me for them to have deserted me so far as to 
follow Futility and become futile themselves? 

Jer 2:6 They never said, ‘Where is Yahweh, who brought us out of Egypt and led us through the desert, through 
a land of plains and ravines, through a land of drought, of shadow dark as death, a land through which no one 
passes and where no human being lives?’. 

Jer 2:7 I brought you to a country of plenty, to enjoy its produce and good things; but when you entered you 
defiled my country and made my heritage loathsome. 

Jer 2:8 The priests never asked, ‘Where is Yahweh?’. Those skilled in the Law did not know me, the shepherds 
too rebelled against me and the prophets prophesied by Baal and followed the Useless Ones. 

Jer 2:9 So I must state my case against you once more, Yahweh declares, and state my case against your 
children’s children: 

Jer 2:10 Cross to the isles of the Kittim and look, send to Kedarand carefully observe, see if anything like this 
has happened before! 

Jer 2:1 1 Does a nation change its gods? - and these are not gods at all! Yet my people have exchanged their 
Glory for the Useless One! 

Jer 2:12 You heavens, stand aghast at this, horrified, utterly appalled, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 2:13 For my people have committed two crimes: they have abandoned me, the fountain of living water, and 
dug water-tanks for themselves, cracked water-tanks that hold no water. 

Jer 2:14 “Is Israel a slave? Was he born into serfdom, for him to be preyed on like this? 

Jer 2:15 Lions have roared at him, they have made their voices heard. They have left this country a desert, his 
towns lie burnt and uninhabited. 

Jer 2:16 The people of Noph and Tahpanhes have shaved your skull! 

Jer 2:17 Have you not brought this on yourself, by abandoning Yahweh your God, when he was guiding you on 
your way? 

Jer 2:18 What is the good of going to Egypt now to drink the water of the Nile? What is the good of going to 
Assyria to drink the water of the River? 

Jer 2:19 Your wickedness will bring its own punishment, your infidelities will bring you to book, so give thought 
and see how evil and bitter it is to abandon Yahweh your God and not to stand in awe of me, the Lord Yahweh 
Sabaoth declares. 

Jer 2:20 “It is long ago now since you broke your yoke, burst your bonds and said, ‘I will not serve!’. Yet on every 
high hill and under every green tree you have sprawled and played the whore. 



Jer 2:21 Yet I had planted you, a red vine of completely sound stock. How is it you have turned into seedlings of 
a vine that is alien to me? 

Jer 2:22 Even though you scrub yourself with soda and put in quantities of soap, the stain of your guilt would still 
be visible to me, the Lord Yahweh declares. 

Jer 2:23 How dare you say, ‘I am not defiled, I have not run after the Baals?’. Look at your behaviour in the 
Valley, realise what you have done. 

Jer 2:24 A wild she-donkey, at home in the desert, snuffing the breeze in desire; who can control her when she 
is on heat? Males need not trouble to look for her, they will find her in her month. 

Jer 2:25 Beware! Your own foot will go unshod, your own throat grow dry! But you said, ‘It is no use! No! For I 
love the Strangers and they are the ones I shall follow’. 

Jer 2:26 “Like a thief ashamed at being caught, so will the House of Israel be: they, their kings, their chief men, 
their priests and their prophets, 

Jer 2:27 who say to a piece of wood, ‘You are my father’, and to a stone, ‘You gave birth to me’. For they turn 
to me their backs, never their faces; yet when trouble comes they shout, ‘Get up! Save us!’. 

Jer 2:28 Where are your gods you made for yourself? Let them get up if they can save you when trouble comes! 
For you have as many gods as you have towns, Judah! 

Jer 2:29 Why make out a case against me? You have all rebelled against me, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 2:30 In vain I have struck your children, they have not accepted correction; your own sword has devoured 
your prophets like a marauding lion. 

Jer 2:31 Now you of this generation, listen to what Yahweh says: Have I been a desert for Israel, or a land of 
gloom? Why do my people say, ‘We are our own masters, we will come to you no more?’ 

Jer 2:32 Does a girl forget her ornaments, a bride her sash? And yet my people have forgotten me, days 
beyond number. 

Jer 2:33 “How well you set your course in pursuit of love! And so you have schooled your ways to wicked deeds. 
Jer 2:34 The very skirts of your robe are stained with the blood of the poor, of innocent men you never caught 
breaking and entering! And in spite of all this, 

Jer 2:35 you say, ‘I am innocent, let his anger turn from me!’. Now I pass sentence on you for saying, ‘I have not 
sinned’. 

Jer 2:36 “How frivolously you undertake a change of course! But you will be disappointed by Egypt just as you 
were by Assyria. 

Jer 2:37 You will have to leave there too with your hands on your head, for Yahweh has rejected those that you 
rely on, you will come to no good with them”. 

Jer 3:1 “If a man divorces his wife and she leaves him and becomes someöne else’s, has he the right to go back 
to her? Has not that piece of land been totally polluted? And you, having played the whore with many lovers, you 
claim the right to come back to me! Yahweh demands. 

Jer 3:2 “Lift your eyes to the bare heights and look! Where have you not offered your sex! You waited by the 
roadside for them like an Arab in the desert. You have polluted the country with your prostitution and your vices: 
Jer 3:3 this is why the showers have been withheld, the late rains have not come. “But you maintained a 
prostitute’s bold front, with no trace of a blush. 

Jer 3:4 From now on, do not cry out at me, ‘My father! My beloved ever since I was young! 

Jer 3:5 Will he keep up his anger for ever, maintain his wrath to the end?’. You say this but still go on sinning, 

being so obstinate”. 

Jer 3:6 In the days of King Josiah, Yahweh said to me, “Have you seen what disloyal Israel has done? How she 

has made her way up every high hill and to every green tree, and played the whore there? 

Jer 3:7 I thought, ‘After doing all this she will come back to me’. But she did not come back. Her faithless sister 
Judah saw this. 

Jer 3:8 She also saw that I had repudiated disloyal Israel for all her adulteries and given her her divorce papers. 
Her faithless sister Judah, however, was not afraid: she too went and played the whore. 

Jer 3:9 And with her shameless whoring, she polluted the country; she committed adultery with stones and 
pieces of wood. 

Jer 3:10 Worse than all this: Judah, her faithless sister, has come back to me not in sincerity, but only in 
pretence, Yahweh declares”. 

Jer 3:1 1 And Yahweh said to me, “Disloyal Israel is upright, compared with faithless Judah. 

Jer 3:12 So go and shout words towards the north, and say: ‘Come back, disloyal Israel, Yahweh declares, I 
shall frown on you no more, since I am merciful, Yahweh declares. I shall not keep my anger for ever. 

Jer 3:13 Only acknowledge your guilt: how you have rebelled against Yahweh your God, how you have 
prostituted yourself with the Strangers under every green tree and have not listened to my voice, Yahweh 
declares. 

Jer 3:14 ‘Come back, disloyal children, Yahweh declares, for I alone am your Master, and I will take you, one 



from a town, two from a family, and bring you to Zion. 

Jer 3:15 I shall give you shepherds after my own heart, who will pasture you wisely and discreetly. 

Jer 3:16 Then, when you have increased and grown numerous in the country, Yahweh declares, no one will 
ever again say: The ark of the covenant of Yahweh! It will not enter their minds, they will not remember it or miss 
it, nor will another one be made. 

Jer 3:17 When that time comes, Jerusalem will be called: The Throne of Yahweh, and all the nations will 
converge on her, on Yahweh’s name, on Jerusalem, and will no longer follow their own stubborn and wicked 
inclinations. 

Jer 3:18 ‘When those days come, the House of Judah will join the House of Israel; together they will come from 
the land of the north to the country I gave your ancestors as their heritage’. 

Jer 3:19 “And I was thinking: How am I to rank you as my children? I shall give you a country of delights, the 
fairest heritage of all the nations! I thought: You will call me Father and will never cease to follow me. 

Jer 3:20 But like a woman betraying her lover, House of Israel, you have betrayed me”, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 3:21 A noise is heard on the bare heights: the weeping and entreaty of the Israelites, for they have gone 
wildly astray, have forgotten Yahweh their God. 

Jer 3:22 “Come back, disloyal sons, I want to cure your disloyalty”. “We are here, we are coming to you, for you 
are Yahweh our God. 

Jer 3:23 The hills are a delusion after all, so is the tumult of the mountains. Yahweh our God is, after all, the 
saving of Israel. 

Jer 3:24 Shame has devoured what our ancestors worked for ever since we were young, their flocks and herds, 
their sons and their daughters. 

Jer 3:25 Let us lie down in our shame, let our confusion cover us, for we have sinned against Yahweh our God, 
we and our ancestors, from our youth until today, and have not listened to the voice of Yahweh our God”. 

Jer 4:1 “If you come back, Israel, Yahweh declares, if you come back to me, if you take your Horrors out of my 
sight, if you go roving no more, 

Jer 4:2 if you swear, ‘As Yahweh lives!’. truthfully, justly, uprightly, then the nations will bless themselves by him 
and glory in him. 

Jer 4:3 “For Yahweh says this to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, ‘Clear the ground that lies neglected, do not 
sow among thorns. 

Jer 4:4 Circumcise yourselves for Yahweh, apply circumcision to your hearts, men of Judah and inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, or my wrath will leap out like a fire and burn with no one to quench it, in return for the wickedness of 
your deeds’”. 

Jer 4:5 Announce it in Judah, proclaim it in Jerusalem, say, “Sound the trumpet in the countryside, shout the 
message aloud: Mobilise! Take to the fortified towns! 

Jer 4:6 Signpost the way to Zion! Run! Do not delay! For I am bringing disaster from the north, an immense 
calamity. 

Jer 4:7 The lion is up from his thicket, the destroyer of nations is on his way, he has come from his home to 
reduce your land to a desert; your towns will be in ruins, uninhabited. 

Jer 4:8 So wrap yourselves in sackcloth, lament and wail, since Yahweh’s burning anger has not turned away 
from us. 

Jer 4:9 “That day”, Yahweh declares, “the king’s heart will fail him, the princes’ hearts will fail them too, the 
priests will stand aghast, the prophets stupefied”. 

Jer 4:10 Then I said, “Ah, Lord Yahweh, how sadly you deceived this people and Jerusalem when you used to 
say, ‘You will have peace’, whereäs the sword is now at our throats! 

Jer 4:1 1 When that time comes, this will be said to this people and to Jerusalem: The scorching wind from the 
desert heights comes towards the daughter of my people -and not to winnow or to cleanse! 

Jer 4:12 A gale of wind comes to me from over there. Now I myself shall pass sentence on them!”. 

Jer 4:13 Look, he is advancing like the clouds, his chariots like a hurricane, his horses swifter than eagles. 
Disaster for us! We are lost! 

Jer 4:14 Wash your heart clean of wickedness, Jerusalem, and so be saved. How long will you go on 
harbouring your pernicious thoughts? 

Jer 4:15 For a voice from Dan shouts the news, proclaims disaster from the highlands of Ephraim. 

Jer 4:16 Report it to the nations, proclaim it to Jerusalem, “Enemies are coming from a distant country, shouting 
their war cry against the towns of Judah; 

Jer 4:17 they surround her like watchmen round a field because she has rebelled against me”, Yahweh 
declares. 

Jer 4:18 “Your own behaviour and actions have brought this on yourself. Your wickedness, how bitter, has 
stabbed you to the heart!”. 

Jer 4:19 In the pit of my stomach how great my agony! Walls of my heart! My heart is throbbing! I cannot keep 



quiet, for I have heard the trumpet call, the battle cry. 

Jer 4:20 Ruin on ruin is the news: the whole land is laid waste, my tents are suddenly destroyed, in one moment 
all that sheltered me. 

Jer 4:21 How long must I see the standard and hear the trumpet call? 

Jer 4:22 This is because my people are stupid, they do not know me, they are slow-witted children, they have 
no understanding, they are clever enough at doing wrong, but do not know how to do right”. 

Jer 4:23 I looked to the earth — it was a formless waste; to the heavens, and their light had gone. 

Jer 4:24 I looked to the mountains — they were quaking and all the hills rocking to and fro. 

Jer 4:25 I looked — there was no one at all, the very birds of heaven had all fled. 

Jer 4:26 I looked — the fruitful land was a desert, all its towns in ruins before Yahweh, before his burning anger. 

Jer 4:27 Yes, Yahweh has said this, “The whole country will be laid waste, though I shall not annihilate it 
completely. 

Jer 4:28 For this, the earth will go into mourning and the heavens above grow dark. For I have spoken, I have 
decided, I shall not change my mind or go back on it”. 

Jer 4:29 At the din of horseman and archer the entire city takes to flight: some plunge into the thickets, others 
scale the rocks; every town is abandoned, not a single person is left there. 

Jer 4:30 And, once despoiled, what are you going to do? You may dress yourself in scarlet, put on ornaments of 
gold, enlarge your eyes with paint but you make yourself pretty in vain. Your former lovers disdain you, your life 
is what they are seeking. 

Jer 4:31 Yes, I hear screams like those of a woman in labour, anguish like that of a woman giving birth to her 
first child; they are the screams of the daughter of Zion, gasping, hands outstretched, “Unhappy me! I am dying, 
the murderers have killed me!”. 

Jer 5:1 Rove the streets of Jerusalem, now look and enquire, see in her squares if you can find an individual, 
one individual who does right and seeks the truth, and I will pardon her, Yahweh says. 

Jer 5:2 Although they say, “As Yahweh lives”, they are, in fact, swearing a false oath. 

Jer 5:3 Yahweh, do your eyes not look for truth? You have struck them; they have not felt it. You have 
annihilated them, for they ignored the lesson. They have set their faces harder than rock, they have refused to 
repent. 

Jer 5:4 I thought, “These are only the poor! They behave stupidly since they do not know Yahweh’s way or the 
ruling of their God. 

Jer 5:5 I shall approach the great men and speak to them, for these will know Yahweh’s way and the ruling of 
their God”. But these, too, have broken the yoke, have burst the bonds. 

Jer 5:6 And so, a lion from the forest will slaughter them, a wolf from the plains will despoil them, a leopard will 
be lurking round their towns: anyone who goes out will be torn to pieces — because of their many crimes, their 
countless infidelities. 

Jer 5:7 “Why should I pardon you? Your sons have abandoned me, to swear by gods that are not gods at all. I 
fed them full, and they became adulterers, they hurried to the brothel. 

Jer 5:8 They are well-fed, roving stallions, each neighing for his neighbour’s wife. 

Jer 5:9 Shall I fail to punish this, Yahweh demands, or on such a nation to exact vengeance? 

Jer 5:10 Scale her terraces! Destroy! But do not annihilate her completely! Strip off her branches, for Yahweh 
does not own them! 

Jer 5:1 1 How treacherously they have treated me, the House of Israel and the House of Judah! Yahweh 
declares. 

Jer 5:12 “They have denied Yahweh, they have said, ‘He is nothing; no evil will overtake us, we shall not see 
sword or famine. 

Jer 5:13 And the prophets? Nothing but wind; the word is not in them; let those very things happen to them!’”. 
Jer 5:14 Because of this, Yahweh, God Sabaoth, says this, “Since you have said such things, now I shall make 
my words a fire in your mouth, and make this people wood, for the fire to devour. 

Jer 5:15 Now I shall bring on you a nation from afar, House of Israel, Yahweh declares, an enduring nation, an 
ancient nation, a nation whose language you do not know, nor can you grasp what they say. 

Jer 5:16 Their quiver a gaping tomb, they are all of them fighters. 

Jer 5:17 They will devour your harvest and your food, devour your sons and daughters, devour your flocks and 
herds, devour your vines and fig trees, and demolish your fortified towns in which you trust — with the sword!”. 

Jer 5:18 “Yet even in those days, Yahweh declares, I shall not annihilate you completely. 

Jer 5:19 “And when you ask, ‘Why has Yahweh our God done all this to us?’. you will give them this answer, ‘As 
you abandon me to serve alien gods in your own country, so you must serve aliens in a country not your own’. 
Jer 5:20 “Announce this in the House of Jacob, proclaim it in Judah, and say, 

Jer 5:21 ‘Now listen to this, stupid, brainless people who have eyes and do not see, who have ears and do not 
hear! 



Jer 5:22 Have you no fear of me? Yahweh demands. Will you not tremble before me who set the sand as limit to 
the sea, as an everlasting barrier it cannot pass? Its waves may toss but not prevail, they may roar but cannot 
pass beyond. 

Jer 5:23 But this people has a rebellious, unruly heart; they have rebelled and gone! 

Jer 5:24 Nor do they say to themselves: Now we ought to fear Yahweh our God who gives the rain, of autumn 
and of spring, at the right season, and reserves us the weeks appointed for harvest. 

Jer 5:25 Your misdeeds have upset all this, your sins have deprived you of these blessings’. 

Jer 5:26 Yes, there are wicked men among my people who watch like fowlers on the alert; they set traps and 
they catch human beings. 

Jer 5:27 Like a cage full of birds so are their houses full of loot; they have grown rich and powerful because of it, 
Jer 5:28 they are fat, they are sleek, in wickedness they go to any lengths: they have no respect for rights, for 
orphans’ rights, and yet they succeed! They have not upheld the cause of the needy. 

Jer 5:29 Shall I fail to punish this, Yahweh demands, or on such a nation to exact vengeance? 

Jer 5:30 Horrible, disgusting things are happening in the land: 

Jer 5:31 the prophets prophesy falsely and the priests exploit the people. And my people love it! But when the 
end comes, what will you do? 

Jer 6:1 Flee in a body, Benjaminites, right away from Jerusalem! Sound the trumpet in Tekoa! Light the beacon 
on Beth-ha-Cherem! For disaster lowers from the north, an immense calamity. 

Jer 6:2 Beautiful, delicate as she is, I shall destroy the daughter of Zion! 

Jer 6:3 Shepherds are advancing on her with their flocks. They have pitched their tents all round her, each 
grazes his part. 

Jer 6:4 Prepare for holy war against her! To arms! We shall attack at noon! Disaster for us! The light is fading, 
the evening shadows lengthen. 

Jer 6:5 To arms! We shall attack at night and destroy her palaces. 

Jer 6:6 For Yahweh Sabaoth says this, “Cut down trees, throw up an earthwork outside Jerusalem: this is the 
city to be punished, with nothing but oppression in her. 

Jer 6:7 As a well keeps its water fresh so she keeps her wickedness fresh. Violence and ruin are what you hear 
in her, wounds and blows always forced on my attention. 

Jer 6:8 Reform, Jerusalem, or I shall turn my attention away from you and reduce you to a desert, a land without 
people”. 

Jer 6:9 Yahweh Sabaoth says this, “They will glean, glean what is left of Israel like a vine. Like a grape-picker, 
pass your hand again over the branches!”. 

Jer 6:10 To whom should I speak, whom warn, for them to hear? Look, their ears are uncircumcised, they 
cannot listen. Look, for them Yahweh’s word is something to sneer at, they have no taste for it. 

Jer 6:11 So I am full of Yahweh’s wrath, I am weary of holding it in. Then pour it on the children in the streets, 
and on the bands of youths as well, for husband and wife will both be taken, the greybeard and the man weighed 
down with years. 

Jer 6:12 Their houses will pass to other men, so will their fields and wives. Yes, I shall stretch my hand over 
those living in this country, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 6:13 For, from the least to greatest, they are all greedy for gain; prophet no less than priest, all of them 
practise fraud. 

Jer 6:14 Without concern they dress my people’s wound, saying, “Peace! Peace!”. whereäs there is no peace. 

Jer 6:15 They should be ashamed of their loathsome deeds. Not they! They feel no shame, they do not even 
know how to blush. And so as others fall, they too will fall, will be thrown down when I come and punish them, 
Yahweh says. 

Jer 6:16 Yahweh says this, “Stand at the crossroads and look, ask for the ancient paths: which was the good 
way? Take it and you will find rest for yourselves. But they have said, ‘We will not take it’. 

Jer 6:17 I posted look-outs on your behalf: Listen to the sound of the trumpet! But they said, ‘We will not listen’. 
Jer 6:18 Then hear, you nations, and know, assembly, what is going to happen to them! 

Jer 6:19 Listen, earth! Watch, I shall bring disaster on this people: it is the fruit of the way they think, since they 
have not listened to my words nor to my law, but have rejected it. 

Jer 6:20 What do I care about incense imported from Sheba, or fragrant cane from a distant country? Your burnt 
offerings are not acceptable, your sacrifices do not please me”. 

Jer 6:21 And so, Yahweh says this, “In front of this people I shall now lay obstacles for them to stumble over; 
father and son alike, neighbour and friend will perish”. 

Jer 6:22 Yahweh says this, “Look, a people is coming from the land of the north, from the far ends of the earth a 
great nation is rising; 

Jer 6:23 they are armed with bow and spear, they are cruel and pitiless; their noise is like the roaring of the sea; 
they are riding horses, they are ready to fight against you as one man, against you, daughter of Zion. 



Jer 6:24 We have heard the news, our hands fall limp, anguish has gripped us, pain like that of a woman in 
labour. 

Jer 6:25 Do not go out into the countryside, do not venture onto the roads, for the enemy’s sword is there, terror 
on every side. 

Jer 6:26 Put on sackcloth, daughter of my people, roll in ashes; mourn as for an only son, a very bitter dirge. For 
on us suddenly the destroyer is coming. 

Jer 6:27 “I have appointed you as tester of my people, to learn and to test how they behave. 

Jer 6:28 All of them are total rebels peddlers of slander, hard as bronze and iron, all agents of corruption. 

Jer 6:29 The bellows blast away to make the fire burn away the lead. In vain the smelter does his work, for the 
dross is not purged out. 

Jer 6:30 ‘Silver-reject’, men call them, and indeed Yahweh has rejected them!”. 

Jer 7:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 

Jer 7:2 “Stand at the gate of the Temple of Yahweh and there proclaim this message. Say, ‘Listen to the word of 
Yahweh, all you of Judah who come in by these gates to worship Yahweh. 

Jer 7:3 Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: Amend your behaviour and your actions and I will let you 
stay in this place. 

Jer 7:4 Do not put your faith in delusive words, such as: This is Yahweh’s sanctuary, Yahweh’s sanctuary, 
Yahweh’s sanctuary! 

Jer 7:5 But if you really amend your behaviour and your actions, if you really treat one another fairly, 

Jer 7:6 if you do not exploit the stranger, the orphan and the widow, if you do not shed innocent blood in this 
place and if you do not follow other gods, to your own ruin, 

Jer 7:7 then I shall let you stay in this place, in the country I gave for ever to your ancestors of old. 

Jer 7:8 Look, you are putting your faith in delusive, worthless words! 

Jer 7:9 Steal, would you, murder, commit adultery, perjure yourselves, burn incense to Baal, follow other gods 
of whom you know nothing? - 

Jer 7:10 and then come and stand before me in this Temple that bears my name, saying: Now we are safe to go 
on doing all these loathsome things! 

Jer 7:1 1 Do you look on this Temple that bears my name as a den of bandits? I, at any rate, can see straight, 
Yahweh declares. 

Jer 7:12 ‘Now go to the place which used to be mine at Shiloh, where I once gave my name a home; see what I 
have done to it because of the wickedness of my people Israel! 

Jer 7:13 And now, since you have done all these things, Yahweh declares, and refused to listen when I spoke 
so urgently, so persistently, or to answer when I called you, 

Jer 7:14 I shall treat this Temple that bears my name, and in which you put your heart, the place that I gave you 
and your ancestors, just as I treated Shiloh, 

Jer 7:15 and I shall drive you out of my sight, as I did all your kinsfolk, the whole race of Ephraim’. 

Jer 7:16 “You, for your part, must not intercede for this people, nor raise either plea or prayer on their behalf; do 
not plead with me, for I will not listen to you. 

Jer 7:17 Can you not see what they are doing in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 

Jer 7:18 The children collect the wood, the fathers light the fire, the women knead the dough, to make cakes for 
the Queen of Heaven; and, to spite me, they pour libations to alien gods. 

Jer 7:19 Is it really me they spite, Yahweh demands, is it not in fact themselves, to their own confusion? 

Jer 7:20 So, Lord Yahweh says this, ‘My anger, my wrath will be poured down on this place, on man and beast, 
on the trees of the countryside and the fruits of the soil; it will burn, and not be quenched’. 

Jer 7:21 “Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this, ‘Add your burnt offerings to your sacrifices and eat all 
the meat. 

Jer 7:22 For when I brought your ancestors out of Egypt, I said nothing to them, gave them no orders, about 
burnt offerings or sacrifices. 

Jer 7:23 My one command to them was this: Listen to my voice, then I will be your God and you shall be my 
people. In everything, follow the way that I mark out for you, and you shall prosper. 

Jer 7:24 But they did not listen, they did not pay attention; they followed their own devices, their own stubborn 
and wicked inclinations, and got worse rather than better. 

Jer 7:25 From the day your ancestors left Egypt until today, I have sent you all my servants the prophets, 
persistently sending them day after day. 

Jer 7:26 But they have not listened to me, have not paid attention; they have deliberately resisted, behaving 
worse than their ancestors. 

Jer 7:27 So you will tell them all this, but they will not listen to you; you will call them, but they will not answer 
you’. 

Jer 7:28 Then you are to say to them, ‘This is the nation that will neither listen to the voice of Yahweh its God 



nor take correction. Sincerity is no more, it has vanished from their mouths. 

Jer 7:29 ‘Cut off your tresses, throw them away! On the bare heights raise a dirge, for Yahweh has rejected, 
has abandoned, a brood that enrages him!’. 

Jer 7:30 “Yes, the people of Judah have done what displeases me, Yahweh declares. They have set up their 
Horrors in the Temple that bears my name, to defile it, 

Jer 7:31 and have built the high places of Topheth in the Valley of Ben-Hinnom, to burn their sons and 
daughters: a thing I never ordered, that had never entered my thoughts. 

Jer 7:32 So now the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when people will no longer say Topheth or Valley of 
Ben-Hinnom, but Valley of Slaughter. Topheth will become a burial ground, for lack of other space; 

Jer 7:33 the corpses of this people will be food for the birds of the sky and the animals of earth, and there will be 
no one to drive them off. 

Jer 7:34 I shall silence the shouts of rejoicing and mirth and the voices of bridegroom and bride, in the towns of 
Judah and the streets of Jerusalem, for the country will be reduced to desert”. 

Jer 8:1 “When that time comes, Yahweh declares, the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of its chief men, 
the bones of the priests, the bones of the prophets and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, will be taken 
from their tombs. 

Jer 8:2 They will be spread out before the sun, the moon, the whole array of heaven, whom they have loved and 
served, followed, consulted and worshipped. They will not be gathered or reburied but will be left lying on the 
surface like dung. 

Jer 8:3 And death will seem preferable to life to all the survivors of this wicked race, wherever I have driven 
them, Yahweh Sabaoth declares. 

Jer 8:4 “You are to tell them, ‘Yahweh says this: If someöne falls, can he not stand up again? If people stray, 
can they not turn back? 

Jer 8:5 Why does this people persist in acts of infidelity, why does Jerusalem persist in continuous infidelity? 
They cling to illusion, they refuse to turn back. 

Jer 8:6 I have listened attentively: they have never said anything like that. Not one repents of wickedness 
saying: What have I done? Each one keeps returning to the course like a horse charging into battle. 

Jer 8:7 Even the stork in the sky knows the appropriate season; turtledove, swallow and crane observe their 
time of migration. But my people do not know Yahweh’s laws!’”. 

Jer 8:8 How can you say, “We are wise, since we have Yahweh’s Law?”. Look how it has been falsified by the 
lying pen of the scribes! 

Jer 8:9 The wise are put to shame, alarmed, caught out because they have rejected Yahweh’s word. What price 
their wisdom now? 

Jer 8:10 Sol shall give their wives to other men, their fields to new masters, for, from the least to greatest, they 
are all greedy for gain; prophet no less than priest, all of them practise fraud. 

Jer 8:11 Without concern they dress the wound of the daughter of my people, saying, “Peace! Peace!”. whereäs 
there is no peace. 

Jer 8:12 They should be ashamed of their loathsome deeds. Not they! They feel no shame, they do not even 
know how to blush. And so as others fall, they too will fall, will be thrown down when the time for punishing them 
comes, Yahweh says. 

Jer 8:13 I shall put an end to them, Yahweh declares, no more grapes on the vine, no more figs on the fig tree 
only withered leaves: I have found them people to trample on them! 

Jer 8:14 Why are we sitting still? Mobilise! Take to the fortified towns and there fall silent, since Yahweh our 
God means to silence us by giving us poisoned water to drink because we have sinned against him. 

Jer 8:15 We are hoping for peace — no good came of it! For the time of healing — nothing but terror! 

Jer 8:16 From Dan you can hear the snorting of his horses; at the neighing of his stallions the whole country 
quakes; they are coming to devour the country and its contents, the town and those that live in it. 

Jer 8:17 Yes, now I am sending you poisonous snakes against which no charm exists; and they will bite you, 
Yahweh declares. 

Jer 8:18 Incurable sorrow overtakes me, my heart fails me. 

Jer 8:19 Hark, from the daughter of my people the cry for help, ringing far and wide throughout the land! “Is 
Yahweh no longer in Zion, her King no longer there?”. (Why have they provoked me with their idols, with their 
futile foreign gods?) 

Jer 8:20 “Harvest is over, summer at an end, and we have not been saved!”. 

Jer 8:21 The wound of the daughter of my people wounds me too, all looks dark to me, terror grips me. 

Jer 8:22 Is there no balm in Gilead any more? Is no doctor there? Then why is there no progress in the cure of 
the daughter of my people? 

Jer 8:23 Who will turn my head into a fountain, and my eyes into a spring of tears, that I can weep day and night 
over the slain of the daughter of my people? 



Jer 9:1 Who will find me a wayfarer’s shelter in the desert, for me to quit my people, and leave them far behind? 
For all of them are adulterers, a conspiracy of traitors. 

Jer 9:2 They bend their tongues like a bow; not truth but falsehood holds sway in the land; yes, they go from 
crime to crime, but me they do not know, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 9:3 Let each be on his guard against his friend; do not trust a brother, for every brother aims but to supplant, 
and every friend is a peddler of slander. 

Jer 9:4 Each one cheats his friend, never telling the truth; they have trained their tongues to lie and devote all 
their energies to doing wrong. 

Jer 9:5 You live in a world of bad faith! Out of bad faith, they refuse to know me, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 9:6 And, so, Yahweh Sabaoth declares, now I shall purge them and test them, no other way to treat the 
daughter of my people! 

Jer 9:7 Their tongue is a deadly arrow, their words are in bad faith; with his mouth each wishes his neighbour 
peace, while in his heart plotting a trap for him. 

Jer 9:8 Shall I fail to punish them for this, Yahweh demands, or on such a nation fail to exact vengeance? 

Jer 9:9 I raise the wail and lament for the mountains, the dirge for the desert pastures, for they have been burnt: 
no one passes there, the sound of flocks is heard no more. Birds of the sky and animals, all have fled, all are 
gone. 

Jer 9:10 I shall make Jerusalem a heap of ruins, a lair for jackals, and the towns of Judah an uninhabited 
wasteland. 

Jer 9:1 1 Who is wise enough to understand this? To whom has Yahweh’s mouth spoken to explain it? Why is 
the country annihilated, burnt like the desert where no one passes? 

Jer 9:12 Yahweh says, This is because they have forsaken my Law which I gave them and have not listened to 
my voice or followed it, 

Jer 9:13 but have followed their own stubborn hearts, have followed the Baals as their ancestors taught them”. 
Jer 9:14 So Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this, “Now I shall give this people wormwood to eat and 
poisoned water to drink. 

Jer 9:15 I shall scatter them among nations unknown to their ancestors or to them; and I shall pursue them with 
the sword until I have annihilated them”. 

Jer 9:16 Yahweh Sabaoth says this, “Prepare to call for the mourning women! Send for those who are best at it! 
Jer 9:17 Let them lose no time in raising the lament over us! Let our eyes rain tears, our eyelids run with 
weeping! 

Jer 9:18 A lament makes itself heard in Zion, ‘What ruin is ours, what utter shame! For we must leave the 
country, our homes have been knocked down!’”. 

Jer 9:19 Now listen, you women, to Yahweh’s word, let your ears take in the word his own mouth speaks. Teach 
your daughters how to wail and teach one another this dirge, 

Jer 9:20 “Death has climbed in at our windows, and made its way into our palaces; it has cut down the children 
in the street, the young people in the squares- 

Jer 9:21 Speak! Yahweh declares this — human corpses are strewn like dung in the open field, like sheaves left 
by the reaper, with no one to gather them”. 

Jer 9:22 Yahweh says this, “Let the sage not boast of wisdom, nor the valiant of valour, nor the wealthy of 
riches! 

Jer 9:23 But let anyone who wants to boast, boast of this: of understanding and knowing me. For I am Yahweh, 
who acts with faithful love, justice, and uprightness on earth; yes, these are what please me”, Yahweh declares. 
Jer 9:24 “Look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall punish all who are circumcised only in the 
flesh: 

Jer 9:25 Egypt, Judah, Edom, the Ammonites, Moab, and all the men with shaven temples who live in the 
desert. For all those nations, and the whole House of Israel too, are uncircumcised at heart”. 

Jer 10:1 Listen, House of Israel, to the word that Yahweh addresses to you. Yahweh says this: 

Jer 1 0:2 “Do not learn the ways of the nations or take alarm at the heavenly signs, alarmed though the nations 
may be at them. 

Jer 1 0:3 Yes, the customs of the peoples are quite futile: wood, nothing more, cut out of a forest, worked with a 
blade by a carver’s hand, 

Jer 1 0:4 then embellished with silver and gold, then fastened with hammer and nails to keep it from moving. 

Jer 10:5 Like scarecrows in a melon patch, they cannot talk, they have to be carried, since they cannot walk. 
Have no fear of them: they can do no harm — nor any good either!”. 

Jer 10:6 Yahweh, there is no one like you, so great you are, so great your mighty name. 

Jer 1 0:7 Who would not revere you, King of nations? Yes, this is your due. Since of all the wise among the 
nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is not a single one like you. 

Jer 10:8 All of them are brutish and stupid: the Futile Ones’ teaching is but wood, 



Jer 1 0:9 silver leaf imported from Tarshish and gold from Ophir, the work of carver or goldsmith; then dressed 
up in violet and purple, all the work of skilled men. 

Jer 10:10 But Yahweh is the true God. He is the living God, the everlasting King. The earth quakes when he is 
wrathful, the nations cannot endure his fury. 

Jer 10:1 1 “Tell them this, ‘The gods who did not make the heavens and the earth will vanish from the earth and 
from under these heavens’”. 

Jer 10:12 By his power he made the earth, by his wisdom set the world firm, but his discernment spread out the 
heavens. 

Jer 10:13 When he thunders there is a roaring of waters in heaven; he raises clouds from the remotest parts of 
the earth, makes the lightning flash for the downpour, and brings the wind from his storehouse. 

Jer 10:14 At this all people stand stupefied, uncomprehending, every goldsmith blushes for his idols; his 
castings are but delusion, with no breath in them. 

Jer 10:15 They are futile, a laughable production; when the time comes for them to be punished, they will 
vanish. 

Jer 10:16 The Heritage of Jacob is not like these, for he is the maker of everything, and Israel is the tribe that is 
his heritage. His name is Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Jer 10:17 Pick up your pack from the ground, you the besieged! 

Jer 10:18 For Yahweh says this, “Now I shall throw out the inhabitants of the country, this time, and bring 
distress on them, so that they may find me!”. 

Jer 10:19 Disaster is on me! What a wound! My injury is incurable! And I used to think, “If this is the worst, I can 
bear it!”. 

Jer 10:20 But now my tent is destroyed, all my ropes are snapped, my sons have left me and are no more; no 
one is left to put my tent up again or to hang the side-cloths. 

Jer 10:21 The shepherds are the ones who have been stupid: they have not searched for Yahweh. This is why 
they have not prospered and why their whole flock has been dispersed. 

Jer 1 0:22 Listen! A terrible noise! A mighty uproar from the land of the north to reduce the towns of Judah to 
desert, to a lair for jackals! 

Jer 10:23 I know, Yahweh, no one’s course is in his control, nor is it in anyone’s power, as he goes his way, to 
guide his own steps. 

Jer 10:24 Correct me, Yahweh, but with moderation, not in your anger, or you will reduce me to nothing. 

Jer 10:25 Pour out your anger on the nations who do not acknowledge you, and on the families that do not call 
on your name, for they have devoured Jacob, have devoured and made an end of him and reduced his home to 
desolation. 

Jer 11:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, 

Jer 1 1 :2 “Hear the terms of this covenant; tell them to the people of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
Jer 1 1:3 Tell them, ‘Yahweh, God of Israel, says this: Cursed be anyone who will not listen to the terms of this 
covenant 

Jer 1 1 :4 which I ordained for your ancestors when I brought them out of Egypt, out of that iron-foundry. Listen to 
my voice, I told them, carry out all my orders, then you will be my people and I shall be your God, 

Jer 11:5 so that I may fulfil the oath I swore to your ancestors, that I may give them a country flowing with milk 
and honey, as is the case today’”. I replied, “So be it, Yahweh!”. 

Jer 1 1 :6 Then Yahweh said to me, “Proclaim all these terms in the towns of Judah and in the streets of 
Jerusalem, saying, ‘Listen to the terms of this covenant and obey them. 

Jer 1 1 :7 For when I brought your ancestors out of Egypt, I solemnly warned them, and have persistently warned 
them until today, saying: Listen to my voice. 

Jer 1 1:8 But they did not listen, did not pay attention; instead, each followed his own stubborn and wicked 
inclinations. And against them, in consequence, I put into action the words of this covenant which I had ordered 
them to obey and which they had not obeyed’”. 

Jer 1 1 :9 Yahweh said to me, “Plainly there is conspiracy among the people of Judah and the citizens of 
Jerusalem. 

Jer 11:10 They have reverted to the sins of their ancestors who refused to listen to my words: they too are 
following other gods and serving them. The House of Israel and the House of Judah have broken my covenant 
which I made with their ancestors. 

Jer 11:11 And so, Yahweh says this, ‘I shall now bring a disaster on them which they cannot escape; they will 
call to me for help, but I shall not listen to them. 

Jer 11:12 The towns of Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem will then go and call for help to the gods to whom 
they burn incense, but these will be no help at all to them in their time of distress! 

Jer 11:13 ‘For you have as many gods as you have towns, Judah! You have built as many altars to Shame, as 
many incense altars to Baal, as Jerusalem has streets! 



Jer 11:14 ‘You, for your part, must not intercede for this people, nor raise either plea or prayer on their behalf, 
for I will not listen when their distress forces them to call to me for help’. 

Jer 11:15 “What is my beloved doing in my house? She has achieved her wicked plans. Can vows and 
consecrated meat turn disaster from you for you to be so happy? 

Jer 11:16 ‘Green olive-tree covered in fine fruit’, was Yahweh’s name for you. With a shattering noise he has 
set fire to it, its branches are broken”. 

Jer 11:17 And Yahweh Sabaoth, who planted you, has decreed disaster for you because of the evil the House 
of Israel and the House of Judah have done, provoking me by burning incense to Baal. 

Jer 11:18 Yahweh informed me and I knew it; you then revealed their scheming to me. 

Jer 11:19 I for my part was like a trustful lamb being led to the slaughterhouse, not knowing the schemes they 
were plotting against me, “Let us destroy the tree in its strength, let us cut him off from the land of the living, so 
that his name may no longer be remembered!”. 

Jer 1 1 :20 Yahweh Sabaoth, whose judgement is upright, tester of motives and thoughts, I shall see your 
vengeance on them, for I have revealed my cause to you. 

Jer 1 1:21 Against the people of Anathoth who are determined to kill me and say to me, “Do not prophesy in the 
name of Yahweh or you will die at our hands!”. 

Jer 1 1 :22 Yahweh says this, “I am about to punish them. Their young people will die by the sword, their sons 
and daughters by famine. 

Jer 1 1 :23 Not one will be left when I bring disaster on the people of Anathoth, when the year for punishing them 
comes”. 

Jer 12:1 Your uprightness is too great, Yahweh, for me to dispute with you. But I should like to discuss some 
points of justice with you: Why is it that the way of the wicked prospers? Why do all treacherous people thrive? 
Jer 12:2 You plant them, they take root, they flourish, yes, and bear fruit. You are on their lips, yet far from their 
heart. 

Jer 12:3 You know me, Yahweh, you see me, you probe my heart, which is close to yours. Drag them off like 
sheep for the slaughterhouse, reserve them for the day of butchery. 

Jer 12:4 (How long will the land be in mourning, and the grass wither all over the countryside? The animals and 
birds are dying as a result of the wickedness of the inhabitants.) For they say, “God does not see our fate”. 

Jer 12:5 “If you find it exhausting to race against me on foot, how will you compete against horses? In a country 
at peace you feel secure, but how will you fare in the thickets of the Jordan? 

Jer 12:6 “For even your brothers and your own family will betray you. They will pursue you in full cry. Put no faith 
in them when they speak you fair!”. 

Jer 12:7 I have abandoned my house, left my heritage, I have delivered what I dearly loved into the clutches of 
its enemies. 

Jer 12:8 To me, my heritage has behaved like a lion in the forest, it roared at me ferociously: so I now hate it. 

Jer 12:9 I see my heritage as a brightly-coloured bird of prey attacked by birds of prey on every side! Go, 
assemble all the wild animals, make them come and dine! 

Jer 12:10 Many shepherds have laid my vineyard waste, have trampled over my plot of land, the plot of land 
which was my joy, reducing my favourite estate to a deserted wilderness. 

Jer 12:1 1 They have made it a waste; wasted, it mourns before me. The whole country has been devastated 
and no one takes it to heart. 

Jer 12:12 The devastators have arrived on all the bare heights of the desert (for Yahweh wields a devouring 
sword); from one end of the country to the other, there is no peace for any living thing. 

Jer 12:13 Wheat they have sown, thorns they reap: they have worn themselves out, to no profit. They are 
disappointed in their harvests, because of Yahweh’s burning anger. 

Jer 12:14 Yahweh says this, “As regards all my evil neighbours who have laid hands on the heritage I granted 
my people Israel, look, I shall uproot them from their soil, (though I shall uproot the House of Judah from among 
them). 

Jer 12:15 But having uprooted them, I shall take pity on them again and bring them back each to its own 
heritage, each to its own country, 

Jer 12:16 and if they carefully learn my people’s ways and swear by my name, ‘As Yahweh lives’, as they have 
taught my people to swear by Baal, then they will be re-established among my people. 

Jer 12:17 But if any nation refuses to listen, I shall uproot it for ever and destroy it, Yahweh declares”. 

Jer 13:1 Yahweh said this to me, “Go and buy a linen waistcloth and put it round your waist. But do not dip it in 
water”. 

Jer 13:2 And so, as Yahweh had ordered, I bought a waistcloth and put it round my waist. 

Jer 13:3 A second time the word of Yahweh came to me, 

Jer 13:4 “Take the waistcloth that you have bought and are wearing round your waist. Up, go to the Euphrates 
and hide it there in a hole in the rock”. 



Jer 13:5 So I went and hid it by the Euphrates as Yahweh had ordered me. 

Jer 13:6 A long time later, Yahweh said to me, “Up, go to the Euphrates and fetch the waistcloth I ordered you to 
hide there”. 

Jer 13:7 So I went to the Euphrates, and I searched, and I took the waistcloth from the place where I had hidden 
it. And there was the waistcloth ruined, no use for anything. 

Jer 13:8 Then the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Jer 1 3:9 “Yahweh says this, ‘In the same way I shall ruin the pride of Judah, the immense pride of Jerusalem. 
Jer 13:10 This evil people, these people who refuse to listen to my words, who follow their own stubborn 
inclinations and run after other gods, serving and worshipping them — this people will become like this waistcloth, 
no good for anything. 

Jer 13:11 For just as a waistcloth clings to a man’s waist, so I made the whole House of Israel and the whole 
House of Judah cling to me, Yahweh declares, to be my people, my glory, my honour and my pride. But they 
have not listened’. 

Jer 13:12 “You will also say this to them, ‘Yahweh, God of Israel, says this: Any jug can be filled with wine’. And 
if they answer you, ‘Do you think we do not know that any jug can be filled with wine?’. 

Jer 13:13 you are to say, ‘Yahweh says this: Look, I shall fill all the inhabitants of this country, the kings who 
occupy the throne of David, the priests, the prophets and all the citizens of Jerusalem, with drunkenness. 

Jer 13:14 Then I shall smash them one against the other, parents and children all together, Yahweh declares. 
Mercilessly, relentlessly, pitilessly, I shall destroy them’”. 

Jer 13:15 Listen and pay attention, do not be proud: Yahweh is speaking! 

Jer 13:16 Give glory to Yahweh your God before the darkness comes, before your feet stumble on the darkened 
mountains. You hope for light, but he will turn it to shadow dark as death, will change it to blackness. 

Jer 13:17 If you do not listen to this warning, I shall weep in secret for your pride; my eyes will weep bitterly and 
stream with tears, for Yahweh’s flock is being led into captivity. 

Jer 13:18 Tell the king and the queen mother, “Sit in a lower place, since your glorious crown has fallen from 
your head. 

Jer 13:19 The towns of the Negeb are shut off with no one to give access to them. All Judah has been deported, 
deported wholesale”. 

Jer 13:20 Raise your eyes and look at these now coming from the north. Where is the flock once entrusted to 
you, the flock which was your pride? 

Jer 1 3:21 What will you say when they come and punish you, you yourself having taught them? Against you, in 

the lead, will come your friends. Then will not anguish grip you as it grips a woman in labour? 

Jer 1 3:22 And should you ask yourself, “Why is all this happening to me?”. it is because of your great guilt that 
your skirts have been pulled up and you have been manhandled. 

Jer 13:23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? And you, can you do right, being so 
accustomed to wrong? 

Jer 1 3:24 “I shall scatter you like chaff on the desert wind. 

Jer 13:25 This is your share, the part allotted you, from me, Yahweh declares, because you have forgotten me 

and put your trust in Delusion. 

Jer 1 3:26 I am the one who pulls your skirts up over your face to let your shame be seen. 

Jer 1 3:27 Oh! Your adulteries, your shrieks of pleasure, your vile prostitution! On the hills, in the fields, I have 
seen your Horrors. Jerusalem, disaster is coming for you! How much longer till you are made clean?”. 

Jer 14:1 The word of Yahweh that came to Jeremiah on the occasion of the drought. 

Jer 14:2 “Judah is in mourning, her towns are pining, sinking to the ground; a cry goes up from Jerusalem. 

Jer 14:3 The nobles send their servants for water, they come to the water-tanks, find no water, and return with 
their pitchers empty. Dismayed and bewildered, they cover their heads. 

Jer 14:4 Because the soil is all cracked since the country has had no rain; the farmers are dismayed, they cover 
their heads. 

Jer 14:5 Even the doe in the countryside giving birth abandons her young, for there is no grass; 

Jer 14:6 the wild donkeys standing on the bare heights gasp for air like jackals: their eyes grow dim for lack of 
pasture”. 

Jer 14:7 Although our sins witness against us, Yahweh, for your name’s sake, intervene! Yes, our acts of 
infidelity have been many, we have sinned against you! 

Jer 14:8 Yahweh, hope of Israel, its Saviour in time of distress, why are you like a stranger in this country, like a 
traveller staying only for one night? 

Jer 14:9 Why are you like someöne bemused, like a warrior who has no power to rescue? And yet, Yahweh, 
you are among us, we are called by your name. Do not desert us! 

Jer 14:10 Yahweh says this about this people, “They take such pleasure in darting hither and thither, they 
cannot restrain their feet! But Yahweh takes pleasure in them no longer; now he will keep their guilt in mind and 



punish their sins”. 

Jer 14:1 1 Yahweh then said to me, “Do not intercede for this people or their welfare. 

Jer 14:12 If they fast, I will not listen to their plea; if they offer burnt offerings and cereal offerings I will not 
accept them. Rather, I shall make an end of them by sword, famine and plague”. 

Jer 14:13 “Ah, Lord Yahweh”, I answered, “here are the prophets telling them, ‘You will not see the sword, 
famine will not touch you; I promise you true peace in this place’”. 

Jer 14:14 Then Yahweh said to me, “The prophets are prophesying lies in my name; I have not sent them, I 
gave them no orders, I never spoke to them. Delusive visions, hollow predictions, daydreams of their own, that is 
what they prophesy to you. 

Jer 14:15 Therefore, Yahweh says this: The prophets who prophesy in my name when I have not sent them, 
and tell you there will be no sword or famine in this country, these same prophets will meet their end by sword 
and famine. 

Jer 14:16 And as for the people to whom they prophesy, they will be tossed into the streets of Jerusalem, 
victims of famine and the sword, with not a soul to bury them: neither them nor their wives, nor their sons, nor 
their daughters. I shall pour their own wickedness down on them. 

Jer 14:17 “So say this word to them: May my eyes shed tears night and day, unceasingly, since the daughter of 
my people has sustained a fearsome wound, a crippling injury. 

Jer 14:18 If I go into the countryside, there lie those killed by the sword; if I go into the city, I see people tortured 
with hunger; even prophets and priests roam the country at their wits’ end”. 

Jer 14:19 Have you rejected Judah altogether? Does your very soul revolt at Zion? Why have you struck us 
down without hope of cure? We were hoping for peace — no good came of it! For the moment of cure — nothing 
but terror! 

Jer 14:20 Yahweh, we acknowledge our wickedness and our ancestors’ guilt: we have indeed sinned against 
you. 

Jer 14:21 For your name’s sake do not reject us, do not dishonour the throne of your glory. Remember us; do 
not break your covenant with us. 

Jer 14:22 Can any of the nations’ Futile Ones make it rain? Can the heavens of their own accord give showers? 
Are you not the one, Yahweh our God? In you is our hope, since you make all these things. 

Jer 15:1 Yahweh said to me, “Even if Moses and Samuel pleaded before me, I could not sympathise with this 
people! Drive them out of my sight; away with them! 

Jer 15:2 And if they ask you, ‘Where shall we go?’. tell them this, ‘Yahweh says this: Those for the plague, to 
the plague; those for the sword, to the sword; those for famine, to famine; those for captivity, to captivity! 

Jer 15:3 ‘I shall consign them to four kinds of thing, Yahweh declares: the sword to kill, the dogs to drag away, 
the birds of heaven and wild animals of earth to devour and to destroy. 

Jer 1 5:4 I shall make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh son of 
Hezekiah, king of Judah, and what he did in Jerusalem’”. 

Jer 1 5:5 Who is there to pity you, Jerusalem, who to grieve for you, who to go out of his way and ask how you 
are? 

Jer 15:6 “You yourself have rejected me, Yahweh declares, you have turned your back on me; so I have 
stretched my hand over you and destroyed you. Tired of relenting, 

Jer 15:7 I have winnowed them with a winnow at the country’s gates. They have been bereft, I have destroyed 
my people, but they refuse to leave their ways. 

Jer 1 5:8 I have made their widows outnumber the sand of the sea. On the mother of young warriors I bring the 
destroyer in broad daylight. Suddenly I bring anguish and terror down on her. 

Jer 1 5:9 The mother of seven sons grows faint and gasps for breath. It is still day, but already her sun has set, 
she is dismayed and distracted; and the rest of them I shall consign to the sword, to their enemies, Yahweh 
declares”. 

Jer 15:10 A disaster for me, mother, that you bore me to be a man of strife and dissension for the whole 
country. I neither lend nor borrow, yet all of them curse me. 

Jer 15:1 1 Have I not genuinely done my best to serve you, Yahweh? Have I not interceded with you in time of 
disaster and distress! 

Jer 15:12 “Can iron break the iron of the north and the bronze? 

Jer 15:13 Your wealth and your treasures I shall hand over to plunder, without repayment, because of all your 
sins, throughout your territory. 

Jer 15:14 I shall enslave you to your enemies in a country which you do not know, for my anger has kindled a 
fire that will burn you up”. 

Jer 15:15 Yahweh, you know! Remember me, take care of me, and avenge me on my persecutors. However 
long your anger endures, do not snatch me away. Realise that I suffer insult for your sake. 

Jer 15:16 When your words came, I devoured them: your word was my delight and the joy of my heart; for I was 



called by your Name, Yahweh, God Sabaoth. 

Jer 15:17 I never sat in the company of scoffers amusing myself; with your hands on me I held myself aloof, 
since you had filled me with indignation. 

Jer 15:18 Why is my suffering continual, my wound incurable, refusing to be healed? Truly, for me you are a 
deceptive stream with uncertain waters! 

Jer 15:19 To which Yahweh replied, “If you repent, I shall restore you to plead before me. If you distinguish 
between the precious and the base, you shall be as my own mouth. They will come back to you, but you must 
not go back to them. 

Jer 15:20 As far as these people are concerned, I shall make you a fortified wall of bronze. They will fight 
against you but will not overcome you, because I am with you to save you and rescue you, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 1 5:21 I shall rescue you from the clutches of the wicked and redeem you from the grasp of the violent”. 

Jer 16:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows: 

Jer 16:2 “You are not to marry or have sons and daughters in this place. 

Jer 1 6:3 For Yahweh says this regarding the sons and daughters to be born in this place, about the mothers 
who give birth to them, and about the fathers who beget them in this land, 

Jer 1 6:4 ‘They will die of deadly diseases, unlamented and unburied; they will be like dung spread on the 
ground; they will meet their end by sword and famine, and their corpses will be food for the birds of the sky and 
the beasts of earth’. 

Jer 1 6:5 “Yes, Yahweh says this, ‘Go into no house where there is mourning, do not go and lament or grieve 
with them; for I have withdrawn my peace from this people, Yahweh declares, and faithful love and pity too. 

Jer 16:6 High or low, they will die in this country, without burial or lament; there will be no gashing, no shaving of 
the head for them. 

Jer 1 6:7 No bread will be broken for the mourner to comfort him for the dead; no cup of consolation will be 
offered him for his father or his mother. 

Jer 1 6:8 ‘And do not enter a house where there is feasting, to sit with them and eat and drink. 

Jer 1 6:9 For Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: In this place, before your eyes, in your own days, I 
will silence the shouts of rejoicing and mirth and the voices of bridegroom and bride. 

Jer 16:10 ‘When you tell these people this and they ask you: Why has Yahweh decreed such complete and 
total disaster for us? What have we done wrong? What sin have we committed against Yahweh our God? 

Jer 16:1 1 then you are to answer: It is because your ancestors abandoned me, Yahweh declares, and followed 
other gods, and served and worshipped them. They abandoned me and did not keep my Law. 

Jer 16:12 And you for your part have behaved even worse than your ancestors. Look, each of you follows his 
own stubborn and wicked inclinations, without listening to me. 

Jer 16:13 And so, I shall eject you from this country into a country unknown to you or to your ancestors, and 
there you can serve other gods, day and night, for I shall show you no more favour’. 

Jer 16:14 “Look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when people will no longer say, ‘As Yahweh lives who 
brought the Israelites out of Egypt!’. 

Jer 16:15 but, ‘As Yahweh lives who brought the Israelites back from the land of the north and all the countries 
to which he had driven them’. I shall bring them back to the very soil I gave their ancestors”. 

Jer 16:16 “Watch, I shall send for many fishermen, Yahweh declares, and these will fish them up; next, I shall 
send for many huntsmen, and these will hunt them out of every mountain, every hill, and out of the holes in the 
rocks. 

Jer 16:17 For my eyes watch all their ways, these are not hidden from me, and their guilt does not escape my 
gaze. 

Jer 16:18 I shall requite their guilt and their sin twice over, since they have polluted my country with the 
carcases of their Horrors, and filled my heritage with their Abominations”. 

Jer 16:19 Yahweh, my strength, my stronghold, my refuge in time of distress! To you the nations will come from 
the remotest parts of the earth and say, “Our fathers inherited nothing but Delusion, Futility of no use whatever. 
Jer 16:20 Can human beings make their own gods? These are not gods at all!”. 

Jer 16:21 “Now listen, I will make them acknowledge, this time I will make them acknowledge my hand and my 
might; and then they will know that Yahweh is my name”. 

Jer 17:1 “The sin of Judah is written with an iron pen, engraved with a diamond point on the tablet of the heart 
and on the horns of their altars, 

Jer 17:2 while their children remember their altars and their sacred pole beside the green trees, on the lofty hills. 
Jer 17:3 My mountain on the plain, your wealth and all your treasures I shall hand over to be plundered, 
because of the sin of your high places throughout your territory. 

Jer 17:4 You will have to relinquish your heritage which I gave you; I will enslave you to your enemies in a 
country which you do not know, for my fiery anger kindled by you will burn for ever”. 

Jer 17:5 Yahweh says this, “Accursed be anyone who trusts in human beings, who relies on human strength 



and whose heart turns from Yahweh. 

Jer 17:6 Such a person is like scrub in the wastelands: when good comes, it does not affect him since he lives 
in the parched places of the desert, uninhabited, salt land. 

Jer 17:7 “Blessed is anyone who trusts in Yahweh, with Yahweh to rely on. 

Jer 17:8 Such a person is like a tree by the waterside that thrusts its roots to the stream: when the heat comes it 
has nothing to fear, its foliage stays green; untroubled in a year of drought, it never stops bearing fruit. 

Jer 17:9 The heart is more devious than any other thing, and is depraved; who can pierce its secrets? 

Jer 17:10 I, Yahweh, search the heart, test the motives, to give each person what his conduct and his actions 
deserve. 

Jer 17:11 “The partridge will hatch eggs it has not laid. No different is the person who gets riches unjustly: his 
days half done, they will desert him and he prove a fool after all”. 

Jer 17:12 A glorious throne, sublime from the beginning, such is our Holy Place. 

Jer 17:13 Yahweh, hope of Israel, all who abandon you will be put to shame, those who turn from you will be 

registered in the underworld, since they have abandoned Yahweh, the fountain of living water. 

Jer 17:14 Heal me, Yahweh, and I shall be healed, save me, and I shall be saved, for you are my praise. 

Jer 17:15 Look, they keep saying to me, “Where is Yahweh’s word? Let it come true then!”. 

Jer 17:16 Yet I have never urged you to send disaster, I never desired the fatal day, this you know; what came 

from my lips was not concealed from you. 

Jer 17:17 Do not be a terror to me, you, my refuge in time of disaster. 

Jer 17:18 Let my persecutors be confounded, not me, let them, not me, be terrified. On them bring the day of 
disaster, destroy them, destroy them twice over! 

Jer 17:19 Yahweh said this to me, “Go and stand at the Gate of the Sons of the People by which the kings of 
Judah go in and out — and at all the gates of Jerusalem. 

Jer 17:20 Say to them, ‘Listen to the word of Yahweh, you kings of Judah, all you people of Judah too, and all 
you inhabitants of Jerusalem who pass through the gates. 

Jer 17:21 Yahweh says this: As you value your lives, on no account carry a burden on the Sabbath day or bring 
it in through the gates of Jerusalem. 

Jer 17:22 Bring no burden out of your houses on the Sabbath day, and do no work. Keep the Sabbath day holy, 
as I ordered your ancestors. 

Jer 17:23 They would not hear, would not pay attention; they deliberately refused to listen or accept instruction. 
Jer 17:24 But if you listen carefully to me, Yahweh declares, and bring no burden in through the gates of this city 
on the Sabbath day, if you keep the Sabbath holy and do no work on that day, 

Jer 17:25 then, through the gates of this city, kings and princes occupying the throne of David will continue to 
make their entry, riding in chariots or on horseback, they, their chief men, the people of Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. And this city will be inhabited for ever. 

Jer 17:26 They will come from the towns of Judah, from the districts round Jerusalem, from the territory of 
Benjamin, from the lowlands, from the highlands, from the Negeb, to offer burnt offering and sacrifice, and cereal 
offering and incense, to offer thanksgiving sacrifices in the Temple of Yahweh. 

Jer 17:27 But if you do not listen to me to keep the Sabbath day holy, and to refrain from entering the gates of 
Jerusalem with burdens on the Sabbath day, then I shall set fire to its gates; fire will devour the palaces of 
Jerusalem and not be quenched’”. 

Jer 18:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh as follows, 

Jer 1 8:2 “Get up and make your way down to the potter’s house, and there I shall tell you what I have to say”. 

Jer 18:3 So I went down to the potter’s house; and there he was, working at the wheel. 

Jer 1 8:4 But the vessel he was making came out wrong, as may happen with clay when a potter is at work. So 
he began again and shaped it into another vessel, as he thought fit. 

Jer 18:5 Then the word of Yahweh came to me as follows, 

Jer 18:6 “House of Israel, can I not do to you what this potter does? Yahweh demands. Yes, like clay in the 
potter’s hand, so you are in mine, House of Israel. 

Jer 18:7 Sometimes I announce that I shall uproot, break down and destroy a certain nation or kingdom, 

Jer 18:8 but should the nation I have threatened abandon its wickedness, I then change my mind about the 
disaster which I had intended to inflict on it. 

Jer 18:9 Sometimes I announce that I shall build up and plant a certain nation or kingdom, 

Jer 18:10 but should that nation do what displeases me and refuse to listen to my voice, I then change my mind 
about the good which I was intending to confer on it. 

Jer 18:1 1 So now, say this to the people of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ‘Yahweh says this: Listen, I 
am preparing a disaster for you, I am working out a plan against you. So now, each one of you, turn back from 
your evil ways, amend your conduct and actions’. 

Jer 18:12 They, however, will say, ‘It is no use! We shall follow our own plans; each of us will act on his own 



wicked inclinations’”. 

Jer 18:13 Therefore, Yahweh says this, “Ask, please, among the nations if anyone has heard anything like this. 
The Virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing. 

Jer 18:14 Does the snow of Lebanon ever leave the rocks of its slopes? Do the rivers of foreign lands, their cold 
flowing waters, ever run dry? 

Jer 18:15 And yet my people have forgotten me! They burn incense to a Nothing! They have been made to 
stumble in their ways, the ancient paths, to walk in paths, on an unmade road, 

Jer 18:16 to make their country an object of horror, everlastingly derided: every passer-by will be appalled at it 
and shake his head. 

Jer 18:17 Like the east wind, I shall scatter them before the enemy. I shall show them my back, not my face, the 
day they are ruined”. 

Jer 18:18 “Come on”, they said, “let us concoct a plot against Jeremiah, for the Law will not perish for lack of 
priests, nor advice for lack of wise men, nor the word for lack of prophets. Come on, let us slander him and pay 
no attention to anything he says”. 

Jer 18:19 Pay attention to me, Yahweh, hear what my adversaries are saying. 

Jer 1 8:20 Should evil be returned for good? Now they are digging a pit for me. Remember how I pleaded before 
you and spoke good of them, to turn your retribution away from them. 

Jer 1 8:21 So, hand their sons over to famine, abandon them to the edge of the sword. Let their wives become 
childless and widowed. Let their husbands die of plague, their young men be cut down by the sword in battle. 

Jer 18:22 Let cries re-echo from their houses as you bring raiders suddenly on them. For they have dug a pit to 
catch me, they have laid snares to trap my feet. 

Jer 1 8:23 But you, Yahweh, know all about their murderous plot against me. Do not forgive their guilt, do not 
efface their sin from your sight. Let them be hurled down before you, deal with them while you are angry! 

Jer 19:1 Then Yahweh said to Jeremiah, “Go and buy a potter’s earthenware jug. Take some of the people’s 
elders and some of the senior priests with you. 

Jer 1 9:2 Go out towards the Valley of Ben-Hinnom, just outside the Gate of the Potsherds. There proclaim the 
words I shall say to you. 

Jer 19:3 You must say, ‘Kings of Judah, inhabitants of Jerusalem! Listen to the word of Yahweh! Yahweh 
Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: I am about to bring such a disaster on this place that the ears of every one 
who hears of it will ring. 

Jer 19:4 For they have abandoned me and have made this place unrecognisable, and offered incense here to 
other gods which neither they nor their ancestors nor the kings of Judah ever knew before. They have filled this 
place with the blood of the innocent; 

Jer 1 9:5 for they have built high places for Baal to burn their sons as burnt offerings to Baal, a thing I never 
ordered, never mentioned, that had never entered my thoughts. 

Jer 19:6 So now the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when people will no longer call this place Topheth, or 
Valley of Ben-Hinnom, but Valley of Slaughter. 

Jer 19:7 Because of this place, I shall empty Judah and Jerusalem of sound advice; I shall make them fall by 
the sword before their enemies, by the hand of those determined to kill them; I shall give their corpses as food to 
the birds of the sky and the animals of earth. 

Jer 19:8 And I shall make this city an object of horror and derision; every passer-by will be appalled at it and 
whistle at the sight of all the wounds it has sustained. 

Jer 1 9:9 I shall make them eat the flesh of their own sons and daughters: they will eat one another during the 
siege, in the shortage to which their enemies, and those determined to kill them, will reduce them’. 

Jer 19:10 “You must break this jug in front of the men who are with you, 

Jer 19:1 1 and say to them, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth says this: I am going to break this people and this city just as one 
breaks a potter’s pot, so that it can never be mended again. ‘Topheth will become a burial ground, for lack of 
other burial space. 

Jer 19:12 That is how I shall treat this place, Yahweh declares, and its inhabitants, by making this city like 
Topheth. 

Jer 19:13 The houses of Jerusalem and those of the kings of Judah, all the houses on the roofs of which they 
offered incense to the whole array of heaven and poured libations to other gods, will be unclean, like this place 
Topheth’”. 

Jer 19:14 Jeremiah then came back from Topheth where Yahweh had sent him to prophesy, and stood in the 
court of the Temple of Yahweh and said to all the people, 

Jer 19:15 “Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this, ‘Yes, on this city, and on all the towns belonging to it, I 
shall bring all the disaster which I had decreed for it, since they have stubbornly refused to listen to my words’”. 
Jer 20:1 Now the priest Pashhur son of Immer, who was the chief of police in the Temple of Yahweh, heard 
Jeremiah making this prophecy. 



Jer 20:2 Pashhur struck the prophet Jeremiah and then put him in the stocks, in the Upper Benjamin Gate 
leading into the Temple of Yahweh. 

Jer 20:3 Next day, Pashhur had Jeremiah taken out of the stocks; Jeremiah then said to him, “Not Pashhur but 
Terror-on-every-Side is Yahweh’s name for you. 

Jer 20:4 For Yahweh says this, ‘I am going to hand you over to terror, you and all your friends; they will fall by 
the sword of their enemies, your own eyes will see it. The whole of Judah, too, I shall hand over to the king of 
Babylon; he will carry them off captive to Babylon and put them to the sword. 

Jer 20:5 And all the wealth of this city, all its stores, all its valuables, all the treasures of the kings of Judah, I 
shall hand over to their enemies who will plunder them, round them up and carry them off to Babylon. 

Jer 20:6 As for you, Pashhur, and your whole household, you will go into captivity; you will go to Babylon; there 
you will die, and there be buried, you and all your friends to whom you have prophesied lies’. 1 
Jer 20:7 You have seduced me, Yahweh, and I have let myself be seduced; you have overpowered me: you 
were the stronger. I am a laughing-stock all day long, they all make fun of me. 

Jer 20:8 For whenever I speak, I have to howl and proclaim, “Violence and ruin!”. For me, Yahweh’s word has 
been the cause of insult and derision all day long. 

Jer 20:9 I would say to myself, “I will not think about him, I will not speak in his name any more”, but then there 
seemed to be a fire burning in my heart, imprisoned in my bones. The effort to restrain it wearied me, I could not 
do it. 

Jer 20:10 I heard so many disparaging me, “Terror on every side! Denounce him! Let us denounce him!”. All 
those who were on good terms with me watched for my downfall, “Perhaps he will be seduced into error. Then 
we shall get the better of him and take our revenge!”. 

Jer 20:1 1 But Yahweh is at my side like a mighty hero; my opponents will stumble, vanquished, confounded by 
their failure; everlasting, unforgettable disgrace will be theirs. 

Jer 20:12 Yahweh Sabaoth, you who test the upright, observer of motives and thoughts, I shall see your 
vengeance on them, for I have revealed my cause to you. 

Jer 20:13 Sing to Yahweh, praise Yahweh, for he has delivered the soul of one in need from the clutches of evil 
doers. 

Jer 20:14 A curse on the day when I was born! May the day my mother bore me be unblessed! 

Jer 20:15 A curse on the man who brought my father the news, “A son, a boy has been born to you!”. making him 
overjoyed. 

Jer 20:16 May this man be like the towns that Yahweh overthrew without mercy; may he hear the warning-cry at 
dawn and the shout of battle at high noon, 

Jer 20:17 for not killing me in the womb; my mother would have been my grave and her womb pregnant for 
ever. 

Jer 20:18 Why ever did I come out of the womb to see toil and sorrow and end my days in shame? 

Jer 21:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh when King Zedekiah sent Pashhur son of Malchiah to 
him, with the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah, to say this, 

Jer 21 :2 “Please consult Yahweh for us, since Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon is making war on us: perhaps 
Yahweh will work one of his many miracles for us and force him to withdraw”. 

Jer 21 :3 Jeremiah said to them, “Take this answer to Zedekiah, 

Jer 21 :4 ‘Yahweh, God of Israel, says this: I shall bring back the weapons of war which you are now carrying, 
and with which you are fighting the king of Babylon and the Chaldaeans now besieging you; from outside the 
walls, I shall stack them in the centre of this city. 

Jer 21 :5 And I shall fight against you myself with outstretched hand and mighty arm, in anger, fury and great 
wrath. 

Jer 21 :6 I shall strike down the inhabitants of this city, human and animal; they will die of a great plague. 

Jer 21 :7 Then, Yahweh declares, I shall deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, his officials, the people and those of 
this city who have escaped the plague, the sword, or the famine, into the clutches of Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, into the clutches of their enemies and into the clutches of those determined to kill them; mercilessly, 
relentlessly, pitilessly, he will put them to the sword’. 

Jer 21 :8 “And you must say to this people, ‘Yahweh says this: Look, I offer you a choice between the way of life 
and the way of death. 

Jer 21 :9 Anyone who stays in this city will die by sword, by famine, or by plague; but anyone who leaves it and 
surrenders to the Chaldaeans now besieging you will live; he will escape with his life. 

Jer 21:10 For I am determined on disaster, and not prosperity, for this city, Yahweh declares. It will be handed 
over to the king of Babylon, and he will burn it down’”. 

Jer 21:11 To the royal House of Judah. Listen to the word of Yahweh, 

Jer 21:12 House of David! Yahweh says this: Each morning give fair judgement, rescue anyone who has been 
wronged from the hands of his oppressor, or else my wrath will leap out like a fire, it will burn and no one will be 



able to quench it, because of the wickedness of your actions. 

Jer 21:13 My quarrel is with you, resident of the valley, Rock-in-the-Plain, Yahweh declares, with you that say, 
“Who would dare attack us and enter our lairs?”. 

Jer 21:14 I shall punish you as your actions deserve, Yahweh declares, I shall set fire to its forest and it will 
devour all around it. 

Jer 22:1 Yahweh said this, “Go down to the palace of the king of Judah and there say this word, 

Jer 22:2 ‘Listen to the word of Yahweh, king of Judah now occupying the throne of David, you, your officials and 
your people who go through these gates. 

Jer 22:3 Yahweh says this: Act uprightly and justly; rescue from the hands of the oppressor anyone who has 
been wronged, do not exploit or ill-treat the stranger, the orphan, the widow; shed no innocent blood in this 
place. 

Jer 22:4 For if you are scrupulous in obeying this command, then kings occupying the throne of David will 
continue to make their entry through the gates of this palace riding in chariots or on horseback, they, their 
officials and their people. 

Jer 22:5 But if you do not listen to these words, then I swear by myself, Yahweh declares, this palace shall 
become a ruin! 

Jer 22:6 ‘Yes, this is what Yahweh says about the palace of the king of Judah: You are like Gilead to me, like a 
peak of Lebanon. All the same, I will reduce you to a desert, to uninhabited towns. 

Jer 22:7 I dedicate men to destroy you, each man with his weapons; they will cut down your finest cedars and 
throw them on the fire. 

Jer 22:8 ‘And when many nations pass this city, they will say to one another: Why has Yahweh treated this 
great city like this? 

Jer 22:9 And the answer will be: Because they abandoned the covenant of Yahweh their God to worship other 
gods and serve them’”. 

Jer 22:10 Do not weep for the man who is dead, do not raise the dirge for him. Weep rather for the one who has 
gone away, since he will never come back, never see his native land again. 

Jer 22:1 1 For this is what Yahweh has said about Shallum son of Josiah, king of Judah, who succeeded Josiah 
his father and was forced to leave this place, “He will never come back to it 

Jer 22:12 but will die in the place to which he has been taken captive; and he will never see this country again. 
Jer 22:13 “Disaster for the man who builds his house without uprightness, his upstairs rooms without fair 
judgement, who makes his fellow-man work for nothing, without paying him his wages, 

Jer 22:14 who says, ‘I shall build myself a spacious palace with airy upstairs rooms’, who makes windows in it, 
panels it with cedar, and paints it vermilion. 

Jer 22:15 Are you more of a king because of your passion for cedar? Did your father go hungry or thirsty? But 
he did what is just and upright, so all went well for him. 

Jer 22:16 He used to examine the cases of poor and needy, then all went well. Is not that what it means to know 
me? Yahweh demands. 

Jer 22:17 You on the other hand have eyes and heart for nothing but your own interests, for shedding innocent 
blood and perpetrating violence and oppression”. 

Jer 22:18 That is why Yahweh says this about Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah: “No lamenting for him, 
‘My poor brother! My poor sister!’. No lamenting for him, ‘His poor lordship! His poor majesty!’. 

Jer 22:19 He will have a donkey’s funeral - dragged away and thrown out of the gates of Jerusalem”. 

Jer 22:20 “Climb the Lebanon range and shriek, raise your voice in Bashan, shriek from the Abarim, for all your 
lovers have been ruined! 

Jer 22:21 I spoke to you in your prosperity, but you said, ‘I will not listen!’. From your youth this has been how 
you behaved, refusing to listen to my voice. 

Jer 22:22 The wind will shepherd all your shepherds away and your lovers will go into captivity. Then you will 
blush deep with shame at the thought of all your wickedness. 

Jer 22:23 You who have made the Lebanon your home and made your nest among the cedars, how you will 
groan when anguish overtakes you, pangs like those of a woman in labour! 

Jer 22:24 “As I live, Yahweh declares, even if Coniah son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, were the signet ring on 
my right hand, I would still wrench you off! 

Jer 22:25 I shall hand you over to those determined to kill you, to those you dread, to Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, to the Chaldaeans. 

Jer 22:26 I shall hurl you and the mother who bore you into another country; you were not born there but you 
will both die there. 

Jer 22:27 They will not return to the country to which they desperately long to return”. 

Jer 22:28 Is he a shoddy broken pot, this man Coniah, a crock that no one wants? Why are he and his offspring 
ejected, hurled into a country they know nothing of? 



Jer 22:29 O land, land, land, listen to the word of Yahweh! 

Jer 22:30 Yahweh says this, “List this man as: Childless; a man who made a failure of his life, since none of his 
offspring will succeed in occupying the throne of David, or ruling in Judah again”. 

Jer 23:1 “Disaster for the shepherds who lose and scatter the sheep of my pasture, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 23:2 This, therefore, is what Yahweh, God of Israel, says about the shepherds who shepherd my people, 
‘You have scattered my flock, you have driven them away and have not taken care of them. Right, I shall take 
care of you for your misdeeds, Yahweh declares! 

Jer 23:3 But the remnant of my flock I myself shall gather from all the countries where I have driven them, and 
bring them back to their folds; they will be fruitful and increase in numbers. 

Jer 23:4 For them I shall raise up shepherds to shepherd them and pasture them. No fear, no terror for them 
any more; not one shall be lost, Yahweh declares! 

Jer 23:5 Look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall raise an upright Branch for David; he will 
reign as king and be wise, doing what is just and upright in the country. 

Jer 23:6 In his days Judah will triumph and Israel live in safety. And this is the name he will be called, “Yahweh- 
is-our-Saving-Justice”. ‘ 

Jer 23:7 “So, look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when people will no longer say, ‘As Yahweh lives 
who brought the Israelites out of Egypt’, 

Jer 23:8 but, ‘As Yahweh lives who led back and brought home the offspring of the House of Israel from the 
land of the north and all the countries to which he had driven them, to live on their own soil’”. 

Jer 23:9 On the prophets. My heart is broken within me, I tremble in all my bones; I am like a drunken man, like 
a man overcome with wine, because of Yahweh and his holy words: 

Jer 23:10 “For the country is full of adulterers; yes, because of a curse, the country is in mourning and the 
pasturage in the desert has dried up; they are prompt to do wrong, make no effort to do right. 

Jer 23:1 1 Yes, even prophet and priest are godless, I have detected their wickedness in my own House, 

Yahweh declares. 

Jer 23:12 Because of this, their way will prove treacherous going for them; in the darkness where they are 
driven, there they will fall. For I shall bring disaster on them, when the year for punishing them comes, Yahweh 
declares. 

Jer 23:13 “In the prophets of Samaria I have seen insanity: they prophesied in the name of Baal and led my 
people Israel astray. 

Jer 23:14 But in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen something horrible: adultery, persistent lying, such 
abetting of the wicked that no one renounces his wickedness. To me they are all like Sodom and its inhabitants 
are like Gomorrah. 

Jer 23:15 So this is what Yahweh Sabaoth says about the prophets, ‘Now I shall give them wormwood to eat 
and make them drink poisoned water, since from the prophets of Jerusalem godlessness has spread throughout 
the land’. 

Jer 23:16 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘Do not listen to what those prophets prophesy to you; they are deluding 
you, they retail visions of their own, and not what comes from Yahweh’s mouth. 

Jer 23:17 To those who despise me, they keep saying: Yahweh has spoken: you will have peace! and to all who 
follow their own stubborn inclinations: No disaster will touch you’. 

Jer 23:18 But who has been present in Yahweh’s council and seen, and heard his word? Who has paid 
attention to his word and listened to it? 

Jer 23:19 Look, Yahweh’s hurricane, his wrath, bursts out, a fearsome hurricane, to burst on the heads of the 
wicked; 

Jer 23:20 Yahweh’s anger will not withdraw until he has performed, has carried out, what he has in mind. In the 
final days, you will understand this clearly, 

Jer 23:21 “I did not send these prophets, yet they ran! I did not speak to them, yet they prophesied! 

Jer 23:22 Had they been present in my council, they could have proclaimed my words to my people and turned 
them from their evil way and from the wickedness of their deeds! 

Jer 23:23 “Am I a God when near, Yahweh demands, and not a God when far away? 

Jer 23:24 Can anyone hide somewhere secret without my seeing him? Yahweh demands. Do I not fill heaven 
and earth? Yahweh demands. 

Jer 23:25 “I have heard what the prophets say who make their lying prophecies in my name. ‘I have had a 
dream’, they say, ‘I have had a dream!’. 

Jer 23:26 How long are there to be those among the prophets who prophesy lies and are in fact prophets of 
their own delusions? 

Jer 23:27 They are doing their best, by means of the dreams that they keep telling each other, to make my 
people forget my name, just as their ancestors forgot my name in favour of Baal. 

Jer 23:28 Let the prophet who has had a dream tell it for a dream! And let him who receives a word from me, 



deliver my word accurately! “What have straw and wheat in common? Yahweh demands. 

Jer 23:29 Is my word not like fire, Yahweh demands, is it not like a hammer shattering a rock? 

Jer 23:30 “So, then, I have a quarrel with the prophets, Yahweh declares, that steal my words from one another. 
Jer 23:31 I have a quarrel with the prophets, Yahweh declares, who wag their tongues to utter prophecies. 

Jer 23:32 I have a quarrel with the prophets who make prophecies out of lying dreams, Yahweh declares, who 
recount them, and lead my people astray by their lies and their bragging. I certainly never sent them or 
commissioned them, and they serve no good purpose for this people, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 23:33 “And when this people, or a prophet, or a priest, asks you, ‘What is Yahweh’s burden?’. you must 
answer, ‘You are the burden, and I shall get rid of you, Yahweh declares!’. 

Jer 23:34 “As for the prophet, the priest, or anyone else, who says, ‘Yahweh’s burden’, I shall punish that man, 
and his household too. 

Jer 23:35 This is what you must say to one another, among yourselves, ‘What answer has Yahweh given?’. or 
‘What has Yahweh said?’. 

Jer 23:36 But stop using the expression ‘Yahweh’s burden’, for what each man says will be his own 
responsibility. And you twist the words of the living God, of Yahweh Sabaoth, our God. 

Jer 23:37 This is the way to speak to a prophet, ‘What answer has Yahweh given?’. or ‘What has Yahweh 
said?’. 

Jer 23:38 But if you say, ‘Yahweh’s burden’, then Yahweh says this, ‘Since you use the expression “Yahweh’s 
burden”, when I have warned you to stop saying, “Yahweh’s burden”, 

Jer 23:39 believe me, I shall pick you up and fling you from my presence, you and the city I gave to you and to 
your ancestors. 

Jer 23:40 I shall bring down everlasting shame on you, everlasting and unforgettable disgrace’”. 

Jer 24:1 Yahweh gave me a vision: set out in front of the Temple of Yahweh were two baskets of figs. This was 
after Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had led Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, away into exile from 
Jerusalem, with the chief men of Judah, the blacksmiths and metalworkers, and had taken them to Babylon. 

Jer 24:2 One basket contained excellent figs, like those that ripen first; the other contained very bad figs, so bad 
they were uneatable. 

Jer 24:3 Yahweh said to me, “What do you see, Jeremiah?”. “Figs”, I answered, “the good ones excellent, the bad 
ones very bad, so bad as to be uneatable”. 

Jer 24:4 Then the word of Yahweh was addressed to me, 

Jer 24:5 “Yahweh, the God of Israel, says this, ‘As these figs are good, so I mean to concern myself with the 
welfare of the exiles of Judah whom I have sent from this place to the country of the Chaldaeans. 

Jer 24:6 My eyes will watch over them for their good, to bring them back to this country, to build them up and 
not to break them down, to plant them and not to uproot them. 

Jer 24:7 I shall give them a heart to acknowledge that I am Yahweh. They will be my people and I shall be their 
God, for they will return to me with all their heart. 

Jer 24:8 As for the bad figs, the figs so bad as to be uneatable-yes, Yahweh says this — that is how I shall treat 
Zedekiah king of Judah, his chief men and what is left of Jerusalem, those who remain in this country and those 
living in Egypt. 

Jer 24:9 I shall make them an object of horror, a disaster, to all the kingdoms of the earth, a thing of shame, a 
byword, a laughing-stock, a curse, wherever I shall drive them. 

Jer 24:10 Sword, famine and plague I shall send against them until they have vanished from the soil I gave to 
them and to their ancestors’”. 

Jer 25:1 The word that was addressed to Jeremiah about all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim 
son of Josiah, king of Judah (that is to say the first year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon). 

Jer 25:2 The prophet Jeremiah proclaimed it before all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: 
Jer 25:3 “For twenty-three years, from the thirteenth year of Josiah son of Amon, king of Judah, until today, the 
word of Yahweh has been addressed to me and I have never tired of speaking to you (but you have not listened. 
Jer 25:4 Furthermore, Yahweh has untiringly sent you all his servants the prophets, but you have not listened or 
paid attention). 

Jer 25:5 The message was this, ‘T urn back, each one of you, from your evil behaviour and your evil actions, 
and you will go on living on the soil Yahweh long ago gave to you and your ancestors for ever. 

Jer 25:6 (And do not follow other gods to serve and worship them, do not provoke me with things you 
yourselves have made, and then I shall not harm you.) 

Jer 25:7 But you have not listened to me (Yahweh declares, so that you have now provoked me with things you 
yourselves have made, and thus harmed yourselves)’. 

Jer 25:8 “So-this is what Yahweh Sabaoth says, ‘Since you have not listened to my words, 

Jer 25:9 I shall now send for all the families of the north (Yahweh declares, that is, for Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, my servant) and bring them down on this country and its inhabitants (and on all these surrounding 



nations); I shall curse them with utter destruction and make them an object of horror, of scorn, and ruin them for 
ever. 

Jer 25:10 From them I shall banish the shouts of rejoicing and mirth, the voices of bridegroom and bride, the 
sound of the handmill and the light of the lamp; 

Jer 25:1 1 and this whole country will be reduced to ruin and desolation, and these nations will be enslaved to 
the king of Babylon for seventy years. 

Jer 25:12 (But when the seventy years are over, I shall punish the king of Babylon and that nation, Yahweh 
declares, for the wrong they have done, that is, the country of the Chaldaeans, and make it desolate for ever), 
Jer 25:13 and against that country I shall perform all the words with which I have threatened it, that is, 
everything written in this book’”. 

Jer 25:14 What Jeremiah prophesied against all the nations. ('For these in their turn are to be enslaved to 
powerful nations and great kings, and I shall pay them back as their deeds and handiwork deserve.') 

Jer 25:15 For Yahweh, the God of Israel, said this to me, “Take this cup of the wine of wrath and make all the 
nations to whom I send you drink it; 

Jer 25:16 they will drink and reel and lose their wits, because of the sword I am sending among them”. 

Jer 25:17 I took the cup from Yahweh’s hand and made all the nations to whom Yahweh sent me drink it 
Jer 25:18 (Jerusalem and the towns of Judah, its kings and its chief men, to make them a ruin, an object of 
horror and derision and a curse, as is the case today): 

Jer 25:19 Pharaoh king of Egypt, his officials, his chief men and all his people, 

Jer 25:20 with the whole conglomeration of peoples there (all the kings of the country of Uz); all the kings of the 
country of the Philistines, Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron and what is still left of Ashdod; 

Jer 25:21 Edom, Moab and the Ammonites; 

Jer 25:22 (all) the kings of Tyre, (all) the kings of Sidon, the kings of the island across the sea; 

Jer 25:23 Dedan, Tema, Buz, all the people with shaven temples; 

Jer 25:24 all the kings of Arabia (and all the kings of the conglomeration of peoples) who live in the desert 
Jer 25:25 (all the kings of Zimri), all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of Media; 

Jer 25:26 all the kings of the north, near and far, one after another: in short, all the kingdoms on the face of the 
earth. (As for the king of Sheshak, he will drink last of all.) 

Jer 25:27 “You will say to them, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: Drink! Get drunk! Vomit! Fall, 
never to rise again, before the sword that I am sending among you!’. 

Jer 25:28 If they refuse to take the cup from your hand and drink, you will say to them, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth says 
this: You must drink! 

Jer 25:29 Look, for a start, I am bringing disaster on the city that bears my name, so are you likely to go 
unpunished? You certainly will not go unpunished, for next I shall summon a sword against all the inhabitants of 
the land, Yahweh declares’. 

Jer 25:30 “For your part, you are to prophesy all these words to them. Say to them: ‘Yahweh roars from on high, 
he thunders from his holy dwelling-place, loudly he roars at his own fold, shouts aloud like those who tread the 
grape at all the inhabitants of the land. 

Jer 25:31 The noise resounds to the remotest parts of the earth. For Yahweh is indicting the nations, arraigning 
all humanity for judgement; the wicked he assigns to the sword, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 25:32 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Look, disaster is spreading from nation to nation, a mighty tempest is 
rising from the far ends of the earth. 

Jer 25:33 ‘Those slaughtered by Yahweh that day will be scattered across the world from end to end. No dirge 
will be raised for them; no one will gather them or bury them; they will stay lying on the surface like dung. 

Jer 25:34 ‘Howl, shepherds, shriek, roll on the ground, you lords of the flock, for your days have come to be 
slaughtered and to be scattered, and like a choice vase you will fall. 

Jer 25:35 No refuge then for the shepherds, no escape for the lords of the flock! 

Jer 25:36 Listen! A shriek from the shepherds, a howl from the lords of the flock! For Yahweh has laid their 

pasture waste, 

Jer 25:37 the peaceful sheepfolds are reduced to silence owing to Yahweh’s furious anger. 

Jer 25:38 The lion has left his lair and their country is a wasteland now, owing to the devastating fury, owing to 

his furious anger’”. 

Jer 26:1 At the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah 
from Yahweh, 

Jer 26:2 “Yahweh says this, ‘Stand in the court of the Temple of Yahweh. To all the people from the towns of 
Judah who come to worship in the Temple of Yahweh you will say everything I have ordered you to say, not 
omitting one syllable. 

Jer 26:3 Perhaps they will listen and each turn from his evil way: if so, I shall relent and not bring the disaster on 
them which I intend because of their misdeeds’. 



Jer 26:4 Say to them, ‘Yahweh says this: If you will not listen to me and follow my Law which I have given you, 
Jer 26:5 and pay attention to the words of my servants the prophets whom I have never tired of sending to you, 
although you never have paid attention, 

Jer 26:6 I shall treat this Temple as I treated Shiloh, and make this city a curse for all the nations of the world’”. 
Jer 26:7 The priests and prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah say these words in the Temple of Yahweh. 
Jer 26:8 When Jeremiah had finished saying everything that Yahweh had ordered him to say to all the people, 
the priests and prophets and all the people seized hold of him and said, “You will die for this! 

Jer 26:9 Why have you made this prophecy in Yahweh’s name, ‘This Temple will become like Shiloh, and this 
city become an uninhabited ruin” 1 ?”. And the people all crowded in on Jeremiah in the Temple of Yahweh. 

Jer 26:10 Hearing of this, the chief men of Judah came up from the royal palace to the Temple of Yahweh and 
took their seats at the entry of the New Gate of the Temple of Yahweh. 

Jer 26:1 1 The priests and prophets then said to the chief men and all the people, “This man deserves to die, 
since he has prophesied against this city, as you have heard with your own ears”. 

Jer 26:12 Jeremiah, however, replied to all the chief men and all the people as follows, “Yahweh himself sent 
me to prophesy against this Temple and this city all the things you have heard. 

Jer 26:13 So now amend your behaviour and actions, listen to the voice of Yahweh your God, and Yahweh will 
relent about the disaster that he has decreed for you. 

Jer 26:14 For myself, I am, as you see, in your hands. Do whatever you please or think right with me. 

Jer 26:15 But be sure of this, that if you put me to death, you will be bringing innocent blood on yourselves, on 
this city and on its inhabitants, since Yahweh has truly sent me to you to say all this for you to hear”. 

Jer 26:16 The chief men and all the people then said to the priests and prophets, “This man does not deserve to 
die: he has spoken to us in the name of Yahweh our God”. 

Jer 26:17 And some of the country’s elders rose to address all the assembled people. 

Jer 26:18 “Micah of Moresheth”, they said, “who prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, had this to 
say to all the people of Judah, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Zion will become ploughland, Jerusalem a heap of 
rubble and the Temple Mount a wooded height’. 

Jer 26:19 “Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him to death for this? Did they not rather, fearing 
Yahweh, plead with him, to such effect that Yahweh relented about the disaster which he had decreed for them? 
Are we now to burden our souls with such a crime?”. 

Jer 26:20 There was another man, too, who used to prophesy in Yahweh’s name, Uriah son of Shemaiah, from 
Kiriath-Jearim. He prophesied exactly the same things against this city and this country as Jeremiah. 

Jer 26:21 When King Jehoiakim with all his officers and all the chief men heard what he said, the king was 
determined to put him to death. On hearing this, Uriah took fright and, fleeing, escaped to Egypt. 

Jer 26:22 King Jehoiakim, however, sent Elnathan son of Achbor to Egypt with others, 

Jer 26:23 who brought Uriah back from Egypt and took him to King Jehoiakim, who had him put to the sword 
and his body thrown into the common burial ground. 

Jer 26:24 But Jeremiah had a protector in Ahikam son of Shaphan, so he was not handed over to the people to 
be put to death. 

Jer 27:1 (At the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah 
from Yahweh:) 

Jer 27:2 Yahweh said this to me, “Make yourself thongs and yokes and put them on your neck. 

Jer 27:3 Then send them to the king of Edom, the king of Moab, the king of the Ammonites, the king of Tyre, 
and the king of Sidon, through their envoys accredited to Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem. 

Jer 27:4 Give them the following message for their masters, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: You 
must tell your masters this: 

Jer 27:5 I by my great power and outstretched arm made the earth, the human beings and the animals that are 
on earth, and I give them to whom I please. 

Jer 27:6 For the present, I have handed all these countries over to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, my 
servant; I have even put the wild animals at his service. 

Jer 27:7 (All the nations will serve him, his son and his grandson, until the time for his own country comes in its 
turn, when mighty nations and great kings will enslave him.) 

Jer 27:8 Any nation or kingdom that will not serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and will not bow its neck to 
the yoke of the king of Babylon, I shall punish that nation with sword, famine and plague, Yahweh declares, until 
I have destroyed it by his hand. 

Jer 27:9 For your own part, do not listen to your prophets, your diviners, dreamers, magicians and sorcerers, 
who tell you: You will not be enslaved by the king of Babylon. 

Jer 27:10 They prophesy lies to you, the result of which will be that you will be banished from your soil, that I 
shall drive you out, and you will perish. 

Jer 27:1 1 The nation, however, that is prepared to bend its neck to the yoke of the king of Babylon and serve 



him, I shall leave in peace on its own soil, Yahweh declares, to farm it and stay on it’”. 

Jer 27:12 To Zedekiah king of Judah I spoke in exactly the same terms. “Bend your necks”, I told him, “to the 
yoke of the king of Babylon; serve him and his people and you will survive. 

Jer 27:13 (Why so anxious to die, you and your people, by sword, famine and plague, with which Yahweh has 
threatened the nation refusing to serve the king of Babylon?) 

Jer 27:14 Do not listen to the words the prophets say to you, ‘You will not be enslaved by the king of Babylon’. 
They prophesy lies to you. 

Jer 27:15 Since I have not sent them, Yahweh declares, they prophesy untruths to you in my name. The result 
will be that I shall drive you out, you will perish, and so will the prophets who prophesy to you”. 

Jer 27:16 I also spoke to the priests and to all this people as follows, “Yahweh says this, ‘Do not listen to the 
words of your prophets who prophesy to you as follows: Look, the vessels of the Temple of Yahweh will very 
shortly be brought back from Babylon. They prophesy lies to you. 

Jer 27:17 (Do not listen to them; serve the king of Babylon and you will survive. Why should this city become a 
ruin?) 

Jer 27:18 If they are real prophets, if Yahweh’s word is really with them, they ought now to be pleading with 
Yahweh Sabaoth that the remaining vessels in the Temple of Yahweh, in the palace of the king of Judah and 
elsewhere in Jerusalem, do not go to Babylon too! 

Jer 27:19 For this is what Yahweh Sabaoth says about (the pillars, the Sea, the stands and) the other vessels 
still remaining in this city, 

Jer 27:20 those not carried off by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon when he took Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim, 
king of Judah, into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon (with all the leading men of Judah and Jerusalem). 

Jer 27:21 Yes, this is what Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says about the vessels still remaining in the Temple 
of Yahweh, in the palace of the king of Judah and elsewhere in Jerusalem: 

Jer 27:22 They will be carried off to Babylon (and stay there until the day I punish them), Yahweh declares. 
(Then I shall bring them back and restore them to this place.)’” 

Jer 28:1 That same year, at the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fifth month of the fourth 
year, the prophet Hananiah son of Azzur, a Gibeonite, spoke as follows to Jeremiah in the Temple of Yahweh in 
the presence of the priests and of all the people, 

Jer 28:2 “Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this, ‘I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. 

Jer 28:3 In exactly two years’ time I shall bring back all the vessels of the Temple of Yahweh which 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from here and carried off to Babylon. 

Jer 28:4 And I shall also bring back Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah and all the exiles of Judah who 
have gone to Babylon, Yahweh declares, for I shall break the yoke of the king of Babylon’”. 

Jer 28:5 The prophet Jeremiah then replied to the prophet Hananiah in front of the priests and all the people 
present in the Temple of Yahweh. 

Jer 28:6 “So be it!”. the prophet Jeremiah said, “May Yahweh do so! May he fulfil the words that you have 
prophesied and bring all the vessels of the Temple of Yahweh and all the exiles back to this place from Babylon. 
Jer 28:7 Listen carefully, however, to this word that I am now going to say for you and all the people to hear: 

Jer 28:8 From remote times, the prophets who preceded you and me prophesied war, disaster and plague for 
many countries and for great kingdoms; 

Jer 28:9 the prophet who prophesies peace can be recognised as one truly sent by Yahweh only when his word 
comes true”. 

Jer 28:10 The prophet Hananiah then snatched the yoke off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah and broke it. 

Jer 28:1 1 In front of all the people Hananiah then said, “Yahweh says this, ‘This is how, in exactly two years’ 
time, I shall break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and take it off the necks of all the nations’”. At 
this, the prophet Jeremiah went away. 

Jer 28:12 After the prophet Hananiah had broken the yoke he had snatched off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, 
the word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah, 

Jer 28:13 “Go to Hananiah and tell him this, ‘Yahweh says this: You have broken the wooden yokes only to 
make iron yokes to replace them! 

Jer 28:14 For Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: An iron yoke is what I now lay on the necks of all 
these nations to enslave them to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. (They will be enslaved to him; I have even 
given him the wild animals.)’” 

Jer 28:15 The prophet Jeremiah said to the prophet Hananiah, “Listen carefully, Hananiah: Yahweh has not sent 
you; and thanks to you this people is now relying on what is false. 

Jer 28:16 And so, Yahweh says this, ‘I am going to send you off the face of the earth: you will die this year 
(since you have preached rebellion against Yahweh)’”. 

Jer 28:17 The prophet Hananiah died the same year, in the seventh month. 

Jer 29:1 This is the text of the letter that the prophet Jeremiah sent from Jerusalem to those who were left of the 



elders in exile, to the priests, the prophets and all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had deported from 
Jerusalem to Babylon. 

Jer 29:2 This was after King Jeconiah had left Jerusalem with the queen mother, the eunuchs, the chief men of 
Judah and Jerusalem, and the blacksmiths and metalworkers. 

Jer 29:3 The letter was entrusted to Elasah son of Shaphan and to Gemariah son of Hilkiah, whom Zedekiah 
king of Judah had sent to Babylon, to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. The letter said: 

Jer 29:4 “Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this to all the exiles deported from Jerusalem to Babylon: 

Jer 29:5 Build houses, settle down; plant gardens and eat what they produce; 

Jer 29:6 marry and have sons and daughters; choose wives for your sons, find husbands for your daughters so 
that these can bear sons and daughters in their turn; you must increase there and not decrease. 

Jer 29:7 Work for the good of the city to which I have exiled you; pray to Yahweh on its behalf, since on its 
welfare yours depends. 

Jer 29:8 For Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: Do not be deceived by the prophets who are with 
you or by your diviners; do not listen to the dreams you have, 

Jer 29:9 since they prophesy lies to you in my name. I have not sent them, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 29:10 For Yahweh says this: When the seventy years granted to Babylon are over, I shall intervene on your 
behalf and fulfil my favourable promise to you by bringing you back to this place. 

Jer 29:1 1 Yes, I know what plans I have in mind for you, Yahweh declares, plans for peace, not for disaster, to 
give you a future and a hope. 

Jer 29:12 When you call to me and come and pray to me, I shall listen to you. 

Jer 29:13 When you search for me, you will find me; when you search wholeheartedly for me, 

Jer 29:14 I shall let you find me (Yahweh declares. I shall restore your fortunes and gather you in from all the 
nations and wherever I have driven you, Yahweh declares. I shall bring you back to the place from which I exiled 
you). 

Jer 29:15 “Since you say: Yahweh has raised up prophets for us in Babylon- 

Jer 29:16 this is what Yahweh says about the king now occupying the throne of David and all the people living in 
this city, your brothers who did not go with you into exile: 

Jer 29:17 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: I am now going to send them sword, famine and plague; I shall make 
them like rotten figs, so bad as to be uneatable. 

Jer 29:18 I shall pursue them with sword, famine and plague. I shall make them an object of terror to all the 
kingdoms of the earth, a curse, a thing of horror, scorn and derision to all the nations where I have driven them, 
Jer 29:19 because they have refused to listen to my words, Yahweh declares, although I have persistently sent 
them all my servants the prophets; but they would not listen, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 29:20 But all you exiles, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon, listen to Yahweh’s word! 

Jer 29:21 “This is what Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says about Ahab son of Kolaiah, and Zedekiah son of 
Maaseiah, who prophesy lies to you in my name: I shall hand them over now to Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon who will put them to death before your very eyes. 

Jer 29:22 This curse, based on their fate, will be used by all the exiles of Judah in Babylon: May Yahweh treat 
you like Zedekiah and Ahab, roasted alive by the king of Babylon, 

Jer 29:23 because they have done a scandalous thing in Israel, committing adultery with their neighbour’s wives 
and speaking lying words in my name without orders from me. I know all the same and am witness to it, Yahweh 
declares”. 

Jer 29:24 “And to Shemaiah of Nehelam you will speak as follows: 

Jer 29:25 Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: Since you, on your own initiative, have sent a letter to all 
the people in Jerusalem, to the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah (and to all the priests), saying: 

Jer 29:26 Yahweh has appointed you priest in place of the priest Jehoiada to keep order in the Temple of 
Yahweh, to put any crazy fellow posing as a prophet in the stocks and collar, 

Jer 29:27 why then have you not disciplined Jeremiah of Anathoth, now posing as a prophet to you? 

Jer 29:28 Why, he has even sent us a message in Babylon, saying: It will be a long time. Build houses, settle 
down; plant gardens and eat what they produce.'… 

Jer 29:29 (Now, after the priest Zephaniah had read this letter to the prophet Jeremiah), 

Jer 29:30 the word of Yahweh came then to Jeremiah as follows, 

Jer 29:31 “Send this message to all the exiles, ‘This is what Yahweh says about Shemaiah of Nehelam: Since 
Shemaiah has prophesied to you without my sending him, and since he has caused you to rely on what is false 
Jer 29:32 for that reason, Yahweh declares, I shall punish Shemaiah of Nehelam and his descendants; no male 
member of his family will survive among this people to see the happiness that I will bestow on my people 
(Yahweh declares, since he has preached rebellion against Yahweh)’”. 

Jer 30:1 The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, as follows, 

Jer 30:2 “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘Write for yourself in a book all the words I have spoken to you. 



Jer 30:3 For look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall bring back the captives of my people 
Israel (and Judah), Yahweh says. I shall make them come back and take possession of the country I gave to 
their ancestors’”. 

Jer 30:4 These are the words Yahweh spoke about Israel (and Judah): 

Jer 30:5 Yahweh says this: We have heard a cry of panic, of terror, not of peace. 

Jer 30:6 Now ask and see: can a man bear children? Then why do I see each man with his hands on his loins 
like a woman in labour? Why has every face grown pale? 

Jer 30:7 Disaster! This is the great day, no other like it: a time of distress for Jacob, though he will be saved 
from it. 

Jer 30:8 (That day, Yahweh Sabaoth declares, I shall break the yoke now on your neck and snap your chains; 
and foreigners will enslave you no more, 

Jer 30:9 but Israel and Judah will serve Yahweh their God, and David their king whom I shall raise up for them.) 
Jer 30:10 So do not be afraid, my servant Jacob, Yahweh declares, Israel, do not be alarmed: for look, I shall 
rescue you from distant countries and your descendants from the country where they are captive. Jacob will 
return and be at peace, secure, with no one to trouble him. 

Jer 30:1 1 For I am with you to save you, Yahweh declares, I shall make an end of all the nations where I have 
driven you, but I shall not make an end of you, only discipline you in moderation, not to let you go quite 
unpunished. 

Jer 30:12 Yes, Yahweh says this: Your wound is incurable, your injury past healing. 

Jer 30:13 There is no one to plead your cause; for an ulcer there are remedies, but for you no cure at all. 

Jer 30:14 All your lovers have forgotten you, they look for you no more. Yes, I have struck you as an enemy 
strikes, with cruel punishment (because of your great guilt and countless sins). 

Jer 30:15 Why cry out because of your wound? Your pain is incurable! Because of your great guilt and 
countless sins, I have treated you like this. 

Jer 30:16 But all those who devoured you will be devoured, all your enemies, all, go into captivity, those who 
despoiled you will be despoiled, and all who pillaged you be pillaged. 

Jer 30:17 For I shall restore you to health and heal your wounds, Yahweh declares, you who used to be called 
“Outcast”, “Zion for whom no one cares'. 

Jer 30:18 Yahweh says this: Look, I shall restore the tents of Jacob and take pity on his dwellings: the town will 
be rebuilt on its mound, the stronghold where it ought to stand. 

Jer 30:19 From them will come thanksgiving and shouts of joy. I shall make them increase, they will not 
decrease; I shall make them honoured, no more to be humbled. 

Jer 30:20 Their sons will be as once they were, their community fixed firmly before me, and I shall punish all 
their oppressors. 

Jer 30:21 Their prince will be one of their own, their ruler come from their own people, and I shall permit him to 
approach me freely; for who, otherwise, would be so bold as to approach me, Yahweh demands? 

Jer 30:22 You will be my people and I shall be your God. 

Jer 30:23 Look, Yahweh’s hurricane, his wrath, bursts out, a roaring hurricane, to burst on the heads of the 
wicked; 

Jer 30:24 Yahweh’s burning anger will not turn aside until he has performed, has carried out, what he has in 
mind. In the final days, you will understand this. 

Jer 31:1 When that time comes, Yahweh declares, I shall be the God of all the families of Israel, and they will be 
my people. 

Jer 31 :2 Yahweh says this: They have found pardon in the desert, those who have survived the sword. Israel is 
marching to his rest. 

Jer 31 :3 Yahweh has appeared to me from afar; I have loved you with an everlasting love and so I still maintain 
my faithful love for you. 

Jer 31 :4 I shall build you once more, yes, you will be rebuilt, Virgin of Israel! Once more in your best attire, and 
with your tambourines, you will go out dancing gaily. 

Jer 31 :5 Once more you will plant vineyards on the mountains of Samaria (those who plant will themselves 
enjoy the fruit). 

Jer 31 :6 Yes, a day will come when the watchmen shout on the mountains of Ephraim, “Up! Let us go up to 
Zion, to Yahweh our God!”. 

Jer 31 :7 For Yahweh says this: Shout with joy for Jacob! Hail the chief of nations! Proclaim! Praise! Shout, 
“Yahweh has saved his people, the remnant of Israel!”. 

Jer 31 :8 Watch, I shall bring them back from the land of the north and gather them in from the far ends of the 
earth. With them, the blind and the lame, women with child, women in labour, all together: a mighty throng will 
return here! 

Jer 31:9 In tears they will return, in prayer I shall lead them. I shall guide them to streams of water, by a smooth 



path where they will not stumble. For I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first-born son. 

Jer 31:10 Listen, nations, to the word of Yahweh. On the farthest coasts and islands proclaim it, say, “He who 
scattered Israel is gathering him, will guard him as a shepherd guarding his flock”. 

Jer 31:11 For Yahweh has ransomed Jacob, rescued him from a hand stronger than his own. 

Jer 31:12 They will come, shouting for joy on the heights of Zion, thronging towards Yahweh’s lavish gifts, for 
wheat, new wine and oil, sheep and cattle; they will be like a well-watered garden, they will sorrow no more. 

Jer 31:13 The young girl will then take pleasure in the dance, and young men and old alike; I shall change their 
mourning into gladness, comfort them, give them joy after their troubles; 

Jer 31:14 I shall refresh my priests with rich food, and my people will gorge themselves on my lavish gifts, 
Yahweh declares. 

Jer 31:15 Yahweh says this: A voice is heard in Ramah, lamenting and weeping bitterly: it is Rachel weeping for 
her children, refusing to be comforted for her children, because they are no more. 

Jer 31:16 Yahweh says this: Stop your lamenting dry your eyes, for your labour will have a reward, Yahweh 
declares, and they will return from the enemy’s country. 

Jer 31:17 There is hope for your future after all, Yahweh declares, your children will return to their homeland. 

Jer 31:18 I have indeed heard Ephraim’s grieving, “You flogged me, I took a flogging, like a young, untrained 
bull. Bring me back, let me come back, for you are Yahweh my God! 

Jer 31:19 For, since I turned away, I have repented; having understood, I beat my breast. I was deeply 
ashamed, I blushed, aware of the disgrace incurred when I was young”. 

Jer 31 :20 Is Ephraim, then, so dear a son to me, a child so favoured, that whenever I mention him I remember 
him lovingly still? That is why I yearn for him, why I must take pity on him, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 31 :21 Set up your signposts, raise yourself landmarks, fix your mind on the road, the way by which you 
went. Come home, Virgin of Israel, come home to these towns of yours. 

Jer 31 :22 How long will you hesitate, rebellious daughter? For Yahweh is creating something new on earth: the 
Woman sets out to find her Husband again. 

Jer 31 :23 Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this, “In the country of Judah and in its towns, they will use 
these words once more, when I bring their captives home: ‘Yahweh bless you, home of saving justice, holy 
mountain!’. 

Jer 31 :24 “And in this country, Judah and all its towns, the ploughmen and those who wander with their flocks, 
will live together, 

Jer 31 :25 for I shall give the weary all they need and satisfy all those whose strength has gone”. 

Jer 31 :26 At this, I awoke and saw that my sleep had been sweet to me. 

Jer 31:27 “Look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall sow the House of Israel and the House of 
Judah with the seed both of people and of cattle. 

Jer 31:28 And as I once watched over them to uproot, to knock down, to overthrow, destroy and bring disaster, 
so now I shall watch over them to build and to plant, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 31:29 “In those days people will no longer say: ‘The fathers have eaten unripe grapes; the children’s teeth 
are set on edge’. 

Jer 31 :30 But each will die for his own guilt. Everyone who eats unripe grapes will have his own teeth set on 
edge. 

Jer 31 :31 “Look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall make a new covenant with the House of 
Israel (and the House of Judah), 

Jer 31 :32 but not like the covenant I made with their ancestors the day I took them by the hand to bring them out 
of Egypt, a covenant which they broke, even though I was their Master, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 31 :33 No, this is the covenant I shall make with the House of Israel when those days have come, Yahweh 
declares. Within them I shall plant my Law, writing it on their hearts. Then I shall be their God and they will be my 
people. 

Jer 31 :34 There will be no further need for everyone to teach neighbour or brother, saying, ‘Learn to know 
Yahweh!’. No, they will all know me, from the least to the greatest, Yahweh declares, since I shall forgive their 
guilt and never more call their sin to mind”. 

Jer 31 :35 Yahweh who provides the sun to shine by day, who regulates moon and stars to shine by night, who 
stirs the sea, making its waves roar, he whose name is Yahweh Sabaoth, says this, 

Jer 31 :36 “Were this established order ever to pass away before me, Yahweh declares, then the race of Israel 
would also cease being a nation for ever before me!”. 

Jer 31 :37 Yahweh says this, “Were the heavens above ever to be measured, the foundations of the earth below 
ever to be fathomed, then I too would reject the whole race of Israel for all that they have done, Yahweh 
declares”. 

Jer 31 :38 “Look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when the City will be rebuilt for Yahweh, from the 
Tower of Hananel to the Corner Gate. 



Jer 31 :39 Then once again the measuring line will stretch straight to the Hill of Gareb, turning then to Goah. 

Jer 31 :40 And the whole valley, with its corpses and ashes, and all the ground beside the ravine of the Kidron 
as far as the corner of the Horse Gate, eastwards, will be consecrated to Yahweh. It will never be destroyed or 
demolished again. 

Jer 32:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was 
the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar. 

Jer 32:2 The army of the king of Babylon was then besieging Jerusalem, and the prophet Jeremiah was 
confined in the Court of the Guard in the king of Judah’s palace, 

Jer 32:3 where Zedekiah king of Judah had confined him, saying, “Why do you keep prophesying like this, 
‘Yahweh says this: I am going to hand this city over to the king of Babylon and he will capture it; 

Jer 32:4 and Zedekiah king of Judah will not escape the clutches of the Chaldaeans, but will certainly be 
handed over to the king of Babylon, speak to him personally and see him face to face. 

Jer 32:5 He will take Zedekiah away to Babylon and there he will stay (until I attend to him, Yahweh declares. If 
you fight the Chaldaeans you will not succeed!)’” 

Jer 32:6 Jeremiah said, “The word of Yahweh has been addressed to me as follows, 

Jer 32:7 ‘Look, Hanamel the son of your uncle Shallum will come to you and say: Buy my field at Anathoth, for 
you have the right of redemption to purchase it’. 

Jer 32:8 And, as Yahweh had said, my cousin Hanamel came to me, in the Court of the Guard and said, ‘Buy 
my field at Anathoth in the territory of Benjamin, for you have the right of inheritance and right of redemption; buy 
it’. I knew then that this was Yahweh’s order. 

Jer 32:9 Accordingly, I bought the field from my cousin Hanamel of Anathoth and weighed him out the money: 
seventeen silver shekels. 

Jer 32:10 I drew up the deeds and sealed it, called in witnesses and weighed out the money on the scales. 

Jer 32:1 1 I then took both the sealed deed of purchase (with its stipulations and clauses) and its open copy 
Jer 32:12 and handed over the deed of purchase to Baruch son of Neriah, son of Mahseiah, in the presence of 
my cousin Hanamel, of the witnesses who had signed the deed of purchase, and of all the Judaeans who then 
happened to be in the Court of the Guard. 

Jer 32:13 In their presence I gave Baruch this order, 

Jer 32:14 ‘Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: Take these deeds, the sealed deed of purchase and its 
open copy, and put them in an earthenware pot, so that they may be preserved for a long time. 

Jer 32:15 For Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: Houses, fields and vineyards will again be bought in 
this country’. 

Jer 32:16 “After I had entrusted the deed of purchase to Baruch son of Neriah, I prayed to Yahweh as follows, 
Jer 32:17 ‘Ah, Lord Yahweh, you made the heavens and the earth by your great power and outstretched arm. 

To you nothing is impossible. 

Jer 32:18 You show faithful love to thousands but repay the fathers’ guilt in full to their children after them. Great 
and mighty God, whose name is Yahweh Sabaoth, 

Jer 32:19 great in purpose, mighty in deed, whose eyes are open on all human ways, rewarding every individual 
as that person’s ways and actions deserve! 

Jer 32:20 You performed signs and wonders in Egypt, as you still do in Israel and among humanity today. You 
have won the name for yourself which is yours today. 

Jer 32:21 You brought your people Israel out of Egypt with signs and wonders, with mighty hand and 
outstretched arm and fearsome terror. 

Jer 32:22 Then you gave them this country which you had promised on oath to their ancestors, a country 
flowing with milk and honey. 

Jer 32:23 They then entered it, taking possession of it, but they would not listen to your voice nor follow your 
Law: they would do nothing you ordered them to do; and so you made this total disaster befall them. 

Jer 32:24 Look! The earthworks are already in place to take the city and, by means of sword, famine and 
plague, the city is now within the clutches of the Chaldaeans attacking it. What you said has now come true, as 
you see. 

Jer 32:25 Yet you yourself, Lord Yahweh, told me: Buy the field, pay for it, have it witnessed although the city is 
already in the Chaldaeans’ clutches’”. 

Jer 32:26 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Jer 32:27 “Look, I am Yahweh, God of all humanity. Is anything impossible to me? 

Jer 32:28 “So, Yahweh says this, ‘I shall hand this city over to the Chaldaeans and to Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, and he will capture it; 

Jer 32:29 the Chaldaeans attacking this city will enter it, fire it and burn it to the ground, with the houses on 
whose roofs incense has been offered to Baal and libations poured to other gods, to provoke my anger. 

Jer 32:30 For the people of Israel and Judah alike have done nothing but what displeases me since they were 



young. (The people of Israel in fact have done nothing but provoke my anger by their actions, Yahweh declares.) 
Jer 32:31 Yes, from the day when this city was built until today, it has been such cause of anger and wrath to 
me that I mean to remove it from my sight, 

Jer 32:32 on account of all the wickedness the people of Israel and the people of Judah have done to provoke 
my anger; they, their kings, their chief men, their priests, their prophets, the people of Judah and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem. 

Jer 32:33 They turned to me their backs, never their faces; and though I taught them so urgently, so untiringly, 
they would not listen and accept correction. 

Jer 32:34 Instead, they set up their Horrors in the Temple that bears my name to defile it, 

Jer 32:35 and built the high places of Baal in the Valley of Ben-Hinnom, to burn their sons and daughters alive 
in honour of Molech: a thing I have never ordered, that had never entered my thoughts — that they would cause 
Judah to sin by anything so loathsome! 

Jer 32:36 ‘So now, this is what Yahweh, God of Israel, says about this city of which you now say: By means of 
sword, famine and plague, it is already within the king of Babylon’s clutches: 

Jer 32:37 Look, I shall gather them in from all the countries where I have driven them in my anger, my fury and 
great wrath. I shall bring them back to this place and make them live in safety. 

Jer 32:38 Then they will be my people, and I shall be their God. 

Jer 32:39 I shall give them singleness of heart and singleness of conduct so that they will always fear me, for 
their own good and that of their children after them. 

Jer 32:40 I shall make an everlasting covenant with them, never to cease in my efforts for their welfare, and I 
shall put respect for me in their hearts, so that they will never turn away from me again. 

Jer 32:41 My joy will lie in them and in doing them good, and I shall plant them firmly in this country, with all my 
heart and soul. 

Jer 32:42 For Yahweh says this: Just as I have brought this complete and total disaster on this people, so I shall 
bring them all the good things I have promised them. 

Jer 32:43 Fields will again be bought in this country of which you now say: It is a wasteland without human or 
animal, already in the clutches of the Chaldaeans. 

Jer 32:44 People will buy fields, pay money, draw up deeds, seal them and have them witnessed in the territory 
of Benjamin, in the districts round Jerusalem, in the towns of Judah, of the highlands, of the lowlands and of the 
Negeb. For I shall bring back their captives, Yahweh declares’”. 

Jer 33:1 Jeremiah was still confined to the Court of the Guard when the word of Yahweh came to him a second 
time, as follows, 

Jer 33:2 “Yahweh who made the earth, who formed it and set it firm — Yahweh is his name — says this, 

Jer 33:3 ‘Call to me and I will answer you; I will tell you great secrets of which you know nothing. 

Jer 33:4 For this is what Yahweh, God of Israel, says about the houses of this city and the palaces of the kings 
of Judah which are about to be destroyed by means of the earthworks and the sword; 

Jer 33:5 about those now fighting the Chaldaeans, only to fill the city with corpses, those whom I have 
slaughtered in my furious anger, those whose wickedness has made me hide my face from this city: 

Jer 33:6 Look, I shall bring them remedy and cure; I shall cure them and reveal a new order of peace and loyalty 
to them. 

Jer 33:7 I shall bring back the captives of Judah and the captives of Israel and shall rebuild them as before. 

Jer 33:8 I shall cleanse them of all their guilt, by which they have offended me, I shall forgive all their guilty 
actions, by which they have offended me and rebelled against me. 

Jer 33:9 And, for me, Jerusalem will become a name of joy and praise and pride for all the nations on earth to 
see; when they hear of all the prosperity that I shall give, they will be seized with fear and trembling at all the 
prosperity and the peace that I provide for it’. 

Jer 33:10 “Yahweh says this, ‘In this place of which you now say: It is a ruin, without human or animal, in the 
towns of Judah and desolate streets of Jerusalem where there is neither human nor animal, once more will be 
heard 

Jer 33:1 1 shouts of rejoicing and mirth, the voices of bridegroom and bride, and the singing of those who bring 
thanksgiving sacrifices to the Temple of Yahweh: Give thanks to Yahweh Sabaoth, for Yahweh is good, for his 
faithful love is everlasting. For I shall bring back the country’s captives, as before, Yahweh says’. 

Jer 33:12 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘In this ruinous place, without human or animal, in all its towns, once 
again there will be pastures for the shepherds to rest their flocks. 

Jer 33:13 In the towns of the highlands, of the lowlands and the Negeb, in the territory of Benjamin, in the 
districts round Jerusalem and in the towns of Judah, once again the flocks shall pass under the hand of 
someöne who counts them, Yahweh says. 

Jer 33:14 ‘Look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall fulfil the promise of happiness I made to 
the House of Israel and the House of Judah: 



Jer 33:15 In those days and at that time, I shall make an upright Branch grow for David, who will do what is just 
and upright in the country. 

Jer 33:16 In those days Judah will triumph and Israel live in safety. And this is the name the city will be called: 
Yahweh-is-our-Saving-Justice’. 

Jer 33:17 “For Yahweh says this, ‘David will never lack a male descendant to occupy the throne of the House of 
Israel, 

Jer 33:18 nor will the levitical priests ever lack male descendants to stand before me and offer the burnt 
offering, to burn the cereal offering and offer sacrifice every day’”. 

Jer 33:19 The word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah as follows, 

Jer 33:20 “Yahweh says this, ‘If you could break my covenant with the day and my covenant with the night so 
that day and night do not come at their due time, 

Jer 33:21 then my covenant with David my servant might also be broken and he would have no son to reign on 
his throne, and so also might my covenant with the levitical priests, who are my ministers. 

Jer 33:22 As surely as the array of heaven cannot be counted, nor the sand of the sea be measured, so surely 
shall I increase the heirs of David my servant and the Levites who minister to me’”. 

Jer 33:23 The word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah as follows, 

Jer 33:24 “Have you not noticed what these people say, ‘The two families which Yahweh chose he has now 
rejected?’ So they despise my people, whom they no longer think of as a nation. 

Jer 33:25 Yahweh says this, ‘If I have not created day and night and fixed the laws governing heaven and earth, 
Jer 33:26 why, then I shall reject the descendants of Jacob and of David my servant and cease to choose rulers 
from his descendants for the heirs of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob! For I shall bring back their captives and take 
pity on them’”. 

Jer 34:1 The word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and his whole army, 
with all the kingdoms of the earth under his dominion and all the peoples, were waging war on Jerusalem and all 
its towns, 

Jer 34:2 “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah and tell him, Yahweh says 
this: I am going to hand this city over to the power of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it down. 

Jer 34:3 And you yourself will not escape his clutches but will certainly be captured and handed over to him. 

You will see the king of Babylon face to face and speak to him personally. Then you will go to Babylon. 

Jer 34:4 Even so, listen to the word of Yahweh, Zedekiah king of Judah! This is what Yahweh says about you: 
You will not die by the sword; 

Jer 34:5 you will die in peace. And as spices were burnt for your ancestors, the kings who in times past 
preceded you, so spices will be burnt for you and a dirge sung for you: Alas for his highness! I have spoken, 
Yahweh declares’”. 

Jer 34:6 The prophet Jeremiah repeated all these words to Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem, 

Jer 34:7 while the army of the king of Babylon was attacking Jerusalem and all such towns of Judah as still held 
out, namely Lachish and Azekah, these being the only fortified towns of Judah remaining. 

Jer 34:8 The word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh after King Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people 
in Jerusalem to issue a proclamation freeing their slaves: 

Jer 34:9 each man was to free his Hebrew slaves, men and women, no one was any longer to keep a brother 
Judaean in slavery. 

Jer 34:10 All the chief men and all the people who had entered into the covenant had agreed that everyone 
should free his slaves, men or women, and no longer keep them as slaves: they had agreed on this and set 
them free. 

Jer 34:1 1 Afterwards, however, they changed their minds, recovered the slaves, men and women, whom they 
had set free, and reduced them to slavery again. 

Jer 34:12 The word of Yahweh came then to Jeremiah as follows, 

Jer 34:13 “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘I made a covenant with your ancestors when I brought them out of 
Egypt, out of the house of slavery; it said: 

Jer 34:14 At the end of seven years each one of you is to free his brother Hebrew who has sold himself to you: 
he may be your slave for six years, then you must send him away free. But your ancestors did not listen to me 
and would not pay attention. 

Jer 34:15 Now, today you repented and did what pleases me by proclaiming freedom for your neighbour; you 
made a covenant before me in the Temple that bears my name. 

Jer 34:16 And then you changed your minds and, profaning my name, each of you has recovered his slaves, 
men and women, whom you had sent away free to live their own lives, and has forced them to become your 
slaves again’. 

Jer 34:17 “So Yahweh says this: ‘You have disobeyed me, by failing to grant freedom to brother and neighbour. 
Very well, I in my turn, Yahweh declares, shall leave sword, famine and plague free to deal with you and I shall 



make you an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth. 

Jer 34:18 As for the people who have broken my covenant, who have not observed the terms of the covenant 
which they made before me, I shall treat them like the calf that people cut in two to pass between its pieces. 

Jer 34:19 The chief men of Judah and Jerusalem, the eunuchs, the priests, and all the country people who have 
passed between the pieces of the calf, 

Jer 34:20 I shall hand over to their enemies and those determined to kill them, and their corpses will be food for 
the birds of the sky and the animals of earth. 

Jer 34:21 As for Zedekiah king of Judah and his chief men, I shall hand them to their enemies, to those 
determined to kill them, and to the army of the king of Babylon which has just withdrawn. 

Jer 34:22 Listen, I shall give the order, Yahweh declares, and bring them back to this city to attack it and 
capture it and burn it down. And I shall make an uninhabited waste of the towns of Judah’”. 

Jer 35:1 The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh in the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, 
Jer 35:2 “Go to the clan of the Rechabites and speak to them; bring them into one of the rooms of the Temple of 
Yahweh and offer them wine to drink”. 

Jer 35:3 So I took Jaazaniah son of Jeremiah, son of Habazziniah, with his brothers and all his sons, the whole 
Rechabite clan, 

Jer 35:4 and brought them to the Temple of Yahweh into the room of Ben-Johanan son of Igdaliah, a man of 
God, which was next to that of the chief men, above the room of Maaseiah son of Shallum, guardian of the 
threshold. 

Jer 35:5 I then set pitchers full of wine, and some cups, before the members of the Rechabite clan and said, 
“Drink some wine”. 

Jer 35:6 But they replied, “We do not drink wine, because our ancestor Jonadab son of Rechab gave us this 
order, ‘You must not drink wine, neither you nor your sons for ever; 

Jer 35:7 nor must you build houses, sow seed, plant vineyards or own them, but must live in tents all your lives, 
so that you may live long on the soil to which you are alien’. 

Jer 35:8 We have punctiliously obeyed the orders of our ancestor, Jonadab son of Rechab, never drinking wine 
ourselves, nor our wives, our sons or our daughters, 

Jer 35:9 not building houses to live in, owning neither vineyard nor field nor seed, 

Jer 35:10 living in tents. We have obeyed the orders of our ancestor Jonadab, respecting them in every 
particular. 

Jer 35:1 1 However, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon invaded this country, we decided, ‘We must get 
away! We will go to Jerusalem to escape the armies of the Chaldaeans and Aramaeans’. So that is why we are 
living in Jerusalem”. 

Jer 35:12 Then the word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah as follows, 

Jer 35:13 “Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this, ‘Go and say to the people of Judah and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem: Will you never learn the lesson and listen to my words, Yahweh demands? 

Jer 35:14 The words of Jonadab son of Rechab, ordering his sons to drink no wine, have been observed; 
obedient to their ancestor’s command, they drink none even today . But to me, who spoke to you so urgently, so 
untiringly, you have not listened. 

Jer 35:15 I have urgently and untiringly sent you all my servants the prophets to say: Turn back, each one of 
you, from your evil behaviour and amend your actions, do not follow other gods to serve them, and you will go on 
living on the soil I gave to you and your ancestors. But you have not paid attention or listened to me. 

Jer 35:16 Thus the sons of Jonadab son of Rechab have kept the command their ancestor gave them, but this 
people has not listened to me. 

Jer 35:17 And so, Yahweh, God Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: Look, on Judah and the citizens of Jerusalem 
I am going to bring all the disaster which I have decreed for them, because I spoke to them and they would not 
listen, called to them and they would not answer’”. 

Jer 35:18 Then Jeremiah said to the Rechabite clan, “Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this, ‘Because 
you have obeyed the orders of your ancestor Jonadab and observed all his rules and done everything he 
ordered you to do, 

Jer 35:19 therefore, Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: Jonadab son of Rechab will never lack a 
male descendant to stand before me for ever’”. 

Jer 36:1 In the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, 
Jer 36:2 “Take a scroll and on it write all the words I have spoken to you about Israel, Judah and all the nations, 
from the day I first spoke to you, in the time of Josiah, until today. 

Jer 36:3 Perhaps when the House of Judah hears about all the disaster I intend to inflict on them, they will turn, 
each one of them, from their evil behaviour, so that I can forgive their sinful guilt”. 

Jer 36:4 Jeremiah then summoned Baruch son of Neriah, who at his dictation wrote down on the scroll all the 
words Yahweh had spoken to him. 



Jer 36:5 Jeremiah then gave Baruch this order, “As I am prevented from entering the Temple of Yahweh, 

Jer 36:6 you yourself must go and, from the scroll you wrote at my dictation, read all Yahweh’s words to the 
people in his Temple on the day of the fast, and in this way you can read them in the hearing also of all the 
Judaeans who come in from their towns. 

Jer 36:7 Perhaps their prayers will move Yahweh and they will turn one and all from their evil behaviour, for 
great is the furious anger with which Yahweh has threatened this people”. 

Jer 36:8 Baruch son of Neriah duly carried out the order that the prophet Jeremiah had given him, to read all 
Yahweh’s words from the book in his Temple. 

Jer 36:9 Now, in the fifth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, all the people of 
Jerusalem and all the people who could get to Jerusalem from the towns of Judah were summoned to a fast 
before Yahweh. 

Jer 36:10 Baruch then read Jeremiah’s words from the book; this happened in the room of Gemariah son of the 
scribe Shaphan, in the upper court at the entry of the New Gate of the Temple of Yahweh, where all the people 
could hear. 

Jer 36:1 1 Micaiah son of Gemariah, son of Shaphan, having heard all Yahweh’s words read from the book, 

Jer 36:12 went down to the royal palace, to the scribe’s room. All the chief men were in session: the scribe 
Elishama, Delaiah son of Shemaiah, Elnathan son of Achbor, Gemariah son of Shaphan, Zedekiah son of 
Hananiah and all the other chief men; 

Jer 36:13 and to them Micaiah reported all the words he heard as Baruch was reading the book aloud to the 
people. 

Jer 36:14 The chief men then by common consent sent Jehudi son of Netaniah to Baruch, with Shelemiah son 
of Cushi, to say, “Come, and bring the scroll with you which you have been reading to the people”. 

Jer 36:15 Bringing the scroll with him, Baruch son of Neriah appeared before them. “Sit down”, they said, “and 
read it out”. So Baruch read it to them. 

Jer 36:16 Having heard all the words they turned to one another in alarm and said to Baruch, “We must certainly 
inform the king of this”. 

Jer 36:17 They then questioned Baruch, “Tell us”, they said, “how you came to write all these words”. 

Jer 36:18 “Jeremiah dictated them all to me”, Baruch replied, “and I wrote them down in ink in this book”. 

Jer 36:19 The chief men said to Baruch, “You and Jeremiah had better go into hiding; and do not tell anyone 
where you are”. 

Jer 36:20 Whereupon they went off to the king in the palace court, depositing the scroll in the room of the scribe 
Elishama. They then informed the king of the whole affair. 

Jer 36:21 The king sent Jehudi for the scroll, and he brought it from the room of the scribe Elishama and read it 
to the king and all the chief men standing round the king. 

Jer 36:22 The king was sitting in his winter apartments — it was the ninth month — with a fire burning in a brazier 
in front of him. 

Jer 36:23 Each time Jehudi had read three or four columns, the king cut them off with a scribe’s knife and threw 
them into the fire in the brazier until the whole of the scroll had been burnt in the brazier fire. 

Jer 36:24 But in spite of hearing all these words, neither the king nor any of his courtiers took alarm or tore their 
clothes; 

Jer 36:25 and although Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had urged the king not to burn the scroll he would 
not listen to them, 

Jer 36:26 but ordered the king’s son Jerahmeel and Seraiah son of Azriel and Shelemiah son of Abdeel to 
arrest the scribe Baruch and the prophet Jeremiah. But Yahweh had hidden them. 

Jer 36:27 Then the word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah, after the king had burnt the scroll containing the words 
Baruch had written at Jeremiah’s dictation, 

Jer 36:28 “Take another scroll and write down all the words that were written on the first scroll burnt by 
Jehoiakim king of Judah. 

Jer 36:29 And as regards Jehoiakim king of Judah, you are to say, ‘Yahweh says this: You have burnt that 
scroll, saying: Why have you written down: The king of Babylon will certainly come and lay this country waste 
and leave it without human or animal? 

Jer 36:30 So, this is what Yahweh says about Jehoiakim king of Judah: He will have no one to occupy the 
throne of David, and his corpse will be tossed out to the heat of the day and the frost of the night. 

Jer 36:31 I shall punish him, his offspring and his courtiers for their guilt; on them, on the citizens of Jerusalem 
and on the people of Judah I shall bring the total disaster which I had decreed for them but to which they have 
paid no attention’. 

Jer 36:32 Jeremiah then took another scroll and gave it to the scribe Baruch son of Neriah, who in it at 
Jeremiah’s dictation wrote all the words of the book that Jehoiakim king of Judah had burnt, with many similar 
words in addition. 



Jer 37:1 Zedekiah son of Josiah became king, succeeding Coniah son of Jehoiakim. Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon had made him king of Judah. 

Jer 37:2 But neither he nor his courtiers nor the people of the country paid any attention to the words Yahweh 
spoke through the prophet Jeremiah. 

Jer 37:3 King Zedekiah sent Jehucal son of Shelemiah and the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah to the prophet 
Jeremiah with this message, “Intercede for us with Yahweh our God”. 

Jer 37:4 Now Jeremiah was still moving freely among the people: he had not yet been put in prison. 

Jer 37:5 Meanwhile Pharaoh’s army was on the move from Egypt and the Chaldaeans besieging Jerusalem had 
raised the siege when they heard the news. 

Jer 37:6 Then the word of Yahweh came to the prophet Jeremiah as follows, 

Jer 37:7 “Yahweh, God of Israel, says this, ‘To the king of Judah who sent you to consult me make this reply: Is 
Pharaoh’s army marching to your aid? It will withdraw to its own country, Egypt. 

Jer 37:8 The Chaldaeans will return to attack this city; they will capture it and burn it down. 

Jer 37:9 Yahweh says this: Do not cheer yourselves up by thinking: The Chaldaeans are leaving us for good. 
They are not leaving. 

Jer 37:10 Even if you cut to pieces the whole Chaldaean army now fighting against you until there were only the 
wounded left, they would stand up again, each man in his tent, to burn this city down’”. 

Jer 37:1 1 At the time when the Chaldaean army, threatened by Pharaoh’s army, had raised the siege of 
Jerusalem, 

Jer 37:12 Jeremiah set out from Jerusalem for the territory of Benjamin to see about a piece of his property 
among the people there. 

Jer 37:13 He was at the Benjamin Gate when the guard commander there, a certain Irijah son of Shelemiah, 
son of Hananiah, arrested the prophet Jeremiah, shouting, “You are deserting to the Chaldaeans!”. 

Jer 37:14 Jeremiah answered, “It is a lie! I am not deserting to the Chaldaeans”. But Irijah would not listen to 
Jeremiah and took him under arrest to the chief men. 

Jer 37:15 And the chief men, furious with Jeremiah, had him beaten and shut up in the house of the scribe 
Jonathan, which had been turned into a prison. 

Jer 37:16 Thus Jeremiah found himself in an underground vault. And there for a long time he stayed. 

Jer 37:17 Later, King Zedekiah had him sent for, and the king questioned him privately in his palace. “Is there 
any word from Yahweh?”. he asked. “There is”, Jeremiah answered, and added, “you will be handed over to the 
king of Babylon”. 

Jer 37:18 Jeremiah then said to King Zedekiah, “What wrong have I done you, or your courtiers or this people, 
for you to have put me in prison? 

Jer 37:19 Where are your prophets now who prophesied, ‘The king of Babylon will not attack you or this 
country?’ 

Jer 37:20 So now I beg you to hear me, my lord king! I beg you to approve my request! Do not have me taken 
back to the house of the scribe Jonathan, or I shall die there”. 

Jer 37:21 King Zedekiah then gave an order, and Jeremiah was confined in the Court of the Guard and given a 
loaf of bread a day from the Street of the Bakers as long as there was bread left in the city. So Jeremiah stayed 
in the Court of the Guard. 

Jer 38:1 But Shephatiah son of Mattan, Gedaliah son of Pashhur, Jucal son of Shelemiah and Pashhur son of 
Malchiah heard the words which Jeremiah was saying to all the people, 

Jer 38:2 “Yahweh says this, ‘Anyone who stays in this city will die by sword, famine or plague; but anyone who 
leaves it and surrenders to the Chaldaeans will live; he will escape with his life. 

Jer 38:3 Yahweh says this: This city will certainly be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon, and he will 
capture it’”. 

Jer 38:4 The chief men then said to the king, “You must have this man put to death: he is unquestionably 
disheartening the remaining soldiers in the city, and all the people too, by talking like this. This man is seeking 
not the welfare of the people but their ruin”. 

Jer 38:5 King Zedekiah answered, “He is in your hands as you know, for the king is powerless to oppose you”. 
Jer 38:6 So they took Jeremiah and put him into the storage-well of the king’s son Malchiah in the Court of the 
Guard, letting him down with ropes. There was no water in the storage-well, only mud, and into the mud 
Jeremiah sank. 

Jer 38:7 But Ebed-Melech the Cushite, a eunuch attached to the palace, heard that Jeremiah had been put into 
the storage-well. As the king was sitting in the Benjamin Gate, 

Jer 38:8 Ebed-Melech came out from the palace and spoke to the king. 

Jer 38:9 “My lord king”, he said, “these men have done a wicked thing by treating the prophet Jeremiah like this: 
they have thrown him into the storage-well. He will starve to death there, since there is no more food in the city”. 
Jer 38:10 At this the king gave Ebed-Melech the Cushite the following order: “Take thirty men with you from here 



and pull the prophet Jeremiah out of the storage-well before he dies”. 

Jer 38:1 1 Ebed-Melech took the men with him and went into the palace to the Treasury wardrobe; out of it he 
took some torn, worn-out rags which he lowered on ropes to Jeremiah in the storage-well. 

Jer 38:12 Ebed-Melech the Cushite then said to Jeremiah, These torn, worn-out rags are for you to put under 
your armpits to pad the ropes”. Jeremiah did this. 

Jer 38:13 Then they hauled Jeremiah up with the ropes and pulled him out of the storage-well. And Jeremiah 
stayed in the Court of the Guard. 

Jer 38:14 King Zedekiah had the prophet Jeremiah summoned to him at the third entrance to the Temple of 
Yahweh. “I want to ask you for a word”, the king said to Jeremiah, “keep nothing back from me”. 

Jer 38:15 Jeremiah answered Zedekiah, “If I do proclaim it to you, are you not sure to have me put to death? 
And if I give you advice, you will not listen to me”. 

Jer 38:16 King Zedekiah then secretly swore this oath to Jeremiah, “As Yahweh lives, giver of this life of ours, I 
will have you neither put to death nor handed over to these men who are determined to kill you”. 

Jer 38:17 Jeremiah then said to Zedekiah, “Yahweh, God Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this, ‘If you go out and 
surrender to the king of Babylon’s generals, your life will be safe and this city will not be burnt down; you and 
your family will survive. 

Jer 38:18 But if you do not go out and surrender to the king of Babylon’s generals, this city will be handed over 
to the Chaldaeans and they will burn it down; nor will you yourself escape their clutches’”. 

Jer 38:19 King Zedekiah then said to Jeremiah, “I am afraid of the Judaeans who have already gone over to the 
Chaldaeans: I might be handed over to them and they would ill-treat me”. 

Jer 38:20 “You will not be handed over to them”, Jeremiah replied. “Please listen to Yahweh’s voice as I have 
relayed it to you, and then all will go well with you and your life will be safe. 

Jer 38:21 But if you refuse to surrender, this is what Yahweh has shown me: 

Jer 38:22 the sight of all the women left in the king of Judah’s palace being led off to the king of Babylon’s 
generals and saying: ‘They have misled you, they have triumphed over you, those friends of yours! Your feet 
have sunk in the mud! They are up and away!’. 

Jer 38:23 “Yes, all your wives and children will be led off to the Chaldaeans, and you yourself will not escape 
their clutches but will be a prisoner in the clutches of the king of Babylon. And as for this city, it will be burnt 
down”. 

Jer 38:24 Zedekiah then said to Jeremiah, “Do not let anyone else hear these words or you will die. 

Jer 38:25 If the chief men hear that I have been talking to you, and come and say, ‘Tell us what you said to the 
king and what the king said to you; keep nothing back from us, or we shall put you to death’, 

Jer 38:26 you must reply, ‘I presented this request to the king: that he would not have me sent back to 
Jonathan’s house to die’”. 

Jer 38:27 And in fact all the chief men came to Jeremiah and questioned him. He told them exactly what the 
king had ordered him to say. They then left him in peace, since the conversation had not been overheard. 

Jer 38:28 And Jeremiah stayed in the Court of the Guard until the day Jerusalem was captured. And he was 
there when Jerusalem actually was captured. 

Jer 39:1 In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
advanced on Jerusalem with his entire army, and they laid siege to it. 

Jer 39:2 In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, a breach was made in the city wall. 

Jer 39:3 The king of Babylon’s officials, all having made their entry, took their seats in the Middle Gate: Nergal- 
Sharezer, Samgar-Nebo, Sar-Sechim a high dignitary of state, Nergal-Sharezer the chief astrologer, and all the 
king of Babylon’s other officials … 

Jer 39:4 On seeing them, Zedekiah king of Judah and all the fighting men fled, leaving the city under cover of 
dark, by way of the king’s garden through the gate between the two walls, and made their way towards the 
Arabah. 

Jer 39:5 But the Chaldaean troops pursued them and caught up with Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho. They 
captured him and took him to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon at Riblah in the territory of Hamath, where he 
passed sentence on him. 

Jer 39:6 The king of Babylon had Zedekiah’s sons slaughtered before his eyes at Riblah; the king of Babylon 
also had all the leading men of Judah put to death. 

Jer 39:7 He then put out Zedekiah’s eyes and, loading him with chains, carried him off to Babylon. 

Jer 39:8 The Chaldaeans burnt down the royal palace and the private houses, and demolished the walls of 
Jerusalem. 

Jer 39:9 Nebuzaradan commander of the guard deported the remainder of the population left behind in the city, 
the deserters who had gone over to him, and the rest of the artisans to Babylon. 

Jer 39:10 But Nebuzaradan commander of the guard left some of the poor people behind in the country of 
Judah, those who had nothing, at the same time giving them vineyards and fields. 



Jer 39:1 1 With regard to Jeremiah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had given the following orders to 
Nebuzaradan, commander of the guard, 

Jer 39:12 “Take him, look after him; do him no harm, but treat him as he may ask you”. 

Jer 39:13 He entrusted this mission to (Nebuzaradan commander of the guard,) Nebushazban the high dignitary 
of state, Nergal-Sharezer the chief astrologer and all the king of Babylon’s other officials. 

Jer 39:14 These despatched men to take Jeremiah from the Court of the Guard and turned him over to 
Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan for safe conduct home. So he remained among the people. 

Jer 39:15 While Jeremiah was confined in the Court of the Guard, the word of Yahweh came to him as follows, 
Jer 39:16 “Go and say to Ebed-Melech the Cushite, ‘Yahweh, God of Israel says this: Look, I am about to 
perform my words about this city for its ruin and not for its prosperity. That day they will come true before your 
eyes. 

Jer 39:17 But I shall rescue you that day, Yahweh declares, and you will not be handed over to the hands of the 
men you fear. 

Jer 39:18 Yes, I shall certainly rescue you: you will not fall to the sword; you will escape with your life, because 
you have put your trust in me, Yahweh declares’. 

Jer 40:1 The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh after Nebuzaradan commander of the guard had 
released him from Ramah, where he had found him in chains with all the other captives from Jerusalem and 
Judah who were being deported to Babylon: 

Jer 40:2 The commander of the guard took Jeremiah and said to him, “Yahweh your God foretold calamity for 
this country, 

Jer 40:3 and now he has brought it. He has done what he threatened to do, because you had sinned against 
Yahweh and would not listen to his voice; so all this has happened to you. 

Jer 40:4 Look, today I am having your hands unchained. If you like to come with me to Babylon, come: I shall 
look after you. If you do not want to come with me to Babylon, do not. Look, you have the whole country before 
you: go wherever you think it best and most suitable to go”. 

Jer 40:5 And before Jeremiah retired, he added, “You can go back to Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, 
whom the king of Babylon has appointed governor of the towns of Judah, and stay with him among the people, 
or go anywhere else you think suitable”. With that, the commander of the guard gave him provisions and a 
present, and dismissed him. 

Jer 40:6 Jeremiah went to Mizpah, to Gedaliah son of Ahikam and stayed with him, among those people still left 
in the country. 

Jer 40:7 When the military leaders who with their men were still in the field, all heard that the king of Babylon 
had appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam as governor of the country, making him responsible for the men, women 
and children, and those of the poor country people who had not been deported to Babylon, 

Jer 40:8 they came to Gedaliah at Mizpah: Ishmael son of Nethaniah, Johanan and Jonathan sons of Kareah, 
Seraiah son of Tanhumeth, the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, Jezaniah son of the Maacathite, they and their 
men. 

Jer 40:9 To them and to their men Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, swore an oath. “Do not be afraid”, 
he said, “of serving the Chaldaeans, stay in the country, serve the king of Babylon, and all will go well with you. 
Jer 40:10 I for my part, as the man answerable to the Chaldaeans when they come to us, shall stay here at 
Mizpah, whereäs you can harvest the wine, summer fruit and oil, fill your storage jars and settle in the towns 
which you have seized”. 

Jer 40:1 1 Similarly, when all the Judaeans living in Moab, with the Ammonites, in Edom and elsewhere, heard 
that the king of Babylon had left a remnant in Judah and had appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan 
as their governor, 

Jer 40:12 the Judaeans all came back from wherever they had been driven. On their return to the land of Judah, 
to Gedaliah at Mizpah, they harvested an immense quantity of wine and summer fruit. 

Jer 40:13 Now Johanan son of Kareah and all the military leaders still in the field, came to Gedaliah at Mizpah 
Jer 40:14 and said to him, “Are you aware that Baalis king of the Ammonites has sent Ishmael son of Nethaniah 
to assassinate you?”. But Gedaliah son of Ahikam would not believe them. 

Jer 40:15 Johanan son of Kareah then spoke in secret to Gedaliah at Mizpah, as follows: “Please let me go and 
kill Ishmael son of Nethaniah, and no one will be any the wiser. Why should he assassinate you and cause the 
dispersal of all the Judaeans who have rallied round you. Why should the remnant of Judah perish?”. 

Jer 40:16 But Gedaliah son of Ahikam replied to Johanan son of Kareah, “You will do no such thing, for what 
you say about Ishmael is false”. 

Jer 41:1 In the seventh month, however, Ishmael son of Nethaniah son of Elishama, who was of royal descent, 
came with officers of the king and ten men to Gedaliah son of Ahikam at Mizpah. And as they were taking their 
meal together, there at Mizpah, 

Jer 41 :2 Ishmael son of Nethaniah stood up with his ten men, and attacking Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of 



Shaphan, with their swords, they killed the man whom the king of Babylon had made governor of the country. 

Jer 41 :3 And all the Judaeans who were with him, that is with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and the Chaldaean soldiers 
who happened to be there, Ishmael killed too. 

Jer 41 :4 On the day after the murder of Gedaliah, before the news had become known, 

Jer 41 :5 eighty men arrived from Shechem, Shiloh and Samaria, with their beards shaved off, their clothing torn, 
and covered in self-inflicted gashes; they were bringing cereal offerings and incense with them to present to the 
Temple of Yahweh. 

Jer 41 :6 Ishmael son of Nethaniah went out of Mizpah to meet them, weeping as he went. When he met them 
he said, “Come to Gedaliah son of Ahikam”. 

Jer 41 :7 But once they were well inside the town, Ishmael son of Nethaniah slaughtered them, with the help of 
his men, and had them thrown into the storage-well. 

Jer 41 :8 There were ten of them, however, who said to Ishmael, “Do not kill us: we have stocks of wheat and 
barley, oil and honey, hidden away in the fields”. So he spared them and did not kill them with their brothers. 

Jer 41 :9 The storage-well into which Ishmael threw the corpses of all the men he had killed was a large one, the 
one which King Asa had built as a precaution against Baasha king of Israel. Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled it 
with the slaughtered men. 

Jer 41:10 Ishmael then took all the rest of the people prisoner who were at Mizpah, the king’s daughters and all 
the remaining people in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan, commander of the guard, had entrusted to Gedaliah son 
of Ahikam. Ishmael son of Nethaniah took them prisoner and set out, intending to cross over to the Ammonites. 
Jer 41:11 When Johanan son of Kareah and all the military leaders who were with him heard about all the 
crimes committed by Ishmael son of Nethaniah, 

Jer 41:12 they mustered all their men and set out to attack Ishmael son of Nethaniah. They caught up with him 
at the great Pool of Gibeon. 

Jer 41:13 At the sight of Johanan son of Kareah and all the military leaders with him, all the people with Ishmael 
were delighted. 

Jer 41:14 All the people whom Ishmael had taken as prisoners from Mizpah turned about, went back and joined 
Johanan son of Kareah. 

Jer 41:15 Ishmael son of Nethaniah, however, escaped from Johanan with eight of his men and fled to the 
Ammonites. 

Jer 41:16 Johanan son of Kareah and all the military leaders with him then rallied all the remaining people 
whom Ishmael son of Nethaniah had taken as prisoners from Mizpah after killing Gedaliah son of Ahikam: men — 
fighting men-women, children and eunuchs, whom they brought back from Gibeon. 

Jer 41:17 Setting off, they made a halt at Khan Kimham near Bethlehem, intending to go on to Egypt, 

Jer 41:18 to getaway from the Chaldaeans. They were now terrified of them, since Ishmael son of Nethaniah 
had killed Gedaliah son of Ahikam whom the king of Babylon had made governor of the country. 

Jer 42:1 Then all the military leaders, in particular Johanan son of Kareah and Azariah son of Hoshaiah, and all 
the people from least to greatest, approached 

Jer 42:2 the prophet Jeremiah and said, “Please hear our petition and intercede with Yahweh your God for us 
and for all this remnant — and how few of us are left out of many, your own eyes can see- 
Jer 42:3 so that Yahweh your God may show us the way we are to go and what we must do”. 

Jer 42:4 The prophet Jeremiah replied, “I hear you; I will indeed pray to Yahweh your God as you ask; and 
whatever answer Yahweh your God gives you, I will tell you, keeping nothing back from you”. 

Jer 42:5 They in their turn said to Jeremiah, “May Yahweh be a true and faithful witness against us, if we do not 
follow the instructions that Yahweh your God sends us through you. 

Jer 42:6 Whether we like it or not, we shall obey the voice of Yahweh our God to whom we are sending you, so 
that we may prosper by obeying the voice of Yahweh our God”. 

Jer 42:7 Ten days later the word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah. 

Jer 42:8 He then summoned Johanan son of Kareah and all the military leaders who were with him, and all the 
people from least to greatest, 

Jer 42:9 and said, “Yahweh, God of Israel, to whom you deputed me to present your petition says this, 

Jer 42:10 ‘If you will only stay in this country, I shall build you and not overthrow you; I shall plant you and not 
uproot you, for I am sorry about the disaster I have inflicted on you. 

Jer 42:1 1 Do not be afraid of the king of Babylon, whom you fear now; do not fear him, Yahweh declares, for I 
am with you to save you and rescue you from his clutches. 

Jer 42:12 I shall take pity on you, so that he pities you and lets you return to your native soil. 

Jer 42:13 But if you say: We will not stay in this country; if you disobey the voice of Yahweh your God, 

Jer 42:14 and say: No, Egypt is where we shall go, where we shall not see war or hear the trumpet-call or go 
short of food; that is where we want to live; 

Jer 42:15 in that case, remnant of Judah, listen to Yahweh’s word: Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: If 



you are determined to go to Egypt, and if you do go and settle there, 

Jer 42:16 the sword you fear will overtake you there in Egypt, and there you will die. 

Jer 42:17 Yes, all those who are determined to go to Egypt and settle there, will die by sword, famine and 

plague: not a single one of them will survive or escape the disaster I shall inflict on them. 

Jer 42:18 Yes, Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: Just as my furious anger was poured out on the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so will my fury be poured out on you if you go to Egypt: you will become an object of 
execration and horror, a curse, a laughing-stock; and you will never see this place again’. 

Jer 42:19 Remnant of Judah, Yahweh has told you, ‘Do not go into Egypt’. Understand clearly that today I have 
given you a solemn warning. 

Jer 42:20 You were not being sincere when you sent me to Yahweh your God and said, ‘Intercede for us with 
Yahweh our God; tell us exactly what Yahweh our God says and we will do it’. 

Jer 42:21 Today I have told you, but you have not obeyed the voice of Yahweh your God or any part of the 

message he sent me to give you. 

Jer 42:22 So understand this clearly: you will die by sword, famine and plague in the place where you want to 
go and settle”. 

Jer 43:1 When Jeremiah had finished telling all the people all the words of Yahweh their God, which Yahweh 
their God had sent him to tell them — all the words quoted above- 

Jer 43:2 Azariah son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan son of Kareah, and all those arrogant men, said to Jeremiah, 
“You are lying. Yahweh our God did not send you to say, ‘Do not go to Egypt and settle there’. 

Jer 43:3 It was Baruch son of Neriah, who keeps inciting you against us, to hand us over to the Chaldaeans so 
that they can put us to death or deport us to Babylon”. 

Jer 43:4 So neither Johanan nor any of the military leaders nor any of the people obeyed the voice of Yahweh 
by staying in the country of Judah. 

Jer 43:5 Instead, Johanan son of Kareah and all the military leaders led off the entire remnant of Judah, those 
who had come back from all the nations where they had been driven to live in the country of Judah: 

Jer 43:6 men, women, children, the royal princesses too, and every single person that Nebuzaradan 
commander of the guard had left with Gedaliah son of Ahikam, son of Shaphan, including the prophet Jeremiah 
and Baruch son of Neriah. 

Jer 43:7 And so, in disobedience to the voice of Yahweh, they reached Egypt and arrived at Tahpanhes. 

Jer 43:8 At Tahpanhes the word of Yahweh was addressed to Jeremiah as follows, 

Jer 43:9 “Take some large stones and bury them in the cement on the terrace outside the entrance of Pharaoh’s 
palace in Tahpanhes, where the Judaeans can see you. 

Jer 43:10 Then say to them, ‘Yahweh, God of Israel, says this: Look, I shall send for my servant 
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and he will place his throne on these stones I have buried, and spread his 
canopy above them. 

Jer 43:1 1 When he comes, he will defeat Egypt: Those for the plague, to the plague; those for captivity, to 
captivity; those for the sword, to the sword! 

Jer 43:12 ‘He will set fire to the temples of the gods of Egypt; he will burn these gods or take them prisoner; like 
a shepherd wrapping his cloak round him, so he will wrap Egypt round him, and then leave without anyone 
laying hands on him. 

Jer 43:13 He will break the obelisks of the temple of the Sun in Egypt, and burn down the temples of the gods of 
Egypt’”. 

Jer 44:1 The word that came to Jeremiah for all the Judaeans living in Egypt, those, that is, living in Migdol, 
Tahpanhes, Noph and the territory of Pathros. 

Jer 44:2 “Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this, ‘You have seen all the disaster I have brought on 
Jerusalem and all the towns of Judah; today they lie in ruins and uninhabited. 

Jer 44:3 This was because of the wicked deeds they committed to provoke my anger, by going and offering 
incense and serving other gods whom neither they, nor you, nor your ancestors knew anything about, 

Jer 44:4 although I urgently and untiringly sent you all my servants the prophets to say: You must not do this 
loathsome thing, which I hate. 

Jer 44:5 But they would not listen or pay attention, and turn from their wickedness and stop offering incense to 
other gods. 

Jer 44:6 And so my furious anger overflowed, burning down the towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem, 
which were reduced to ruins and wasteland, as they still are today. 

Jer 44:7 And now, Yahweh, God Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: Why bring complete disaster on yourselves 
by cutting yourselves off from Judah — your men, women, children and babes in arms — so as to leave 
yourselves no remnant, 

Jer 44:8 by provoking my wrath by your actions, offering incense to other gods in Egypt where you have come 
to settle, as though bent on your own destruction and on becoming a curse and a laughing-stock for all the 



nations of the earth? 

Jer 44:9 Have you forgotten the wicked deeds of your ancestors, of the kings of Judah and of your princes, your 
own wicked deeds and those of your wives, committed in the country of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 
Jer 44:10 To this day they have felt neither contrition nor fear; they have not observed my Law or my statutes, 
which I prescribed for you, as for your ancestors. 

Jer 44:1 1 So, Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: Look, I have determined on disaster and shall destroy 
Judah completely. 

Jer 44:12 I shall take the remnant of Judah who were determined to come to Egypt and settle there, and in 
Egypt they will perish; they will fall to the sword or perish of famine, from least to greatest; by sword and famine 
they will die and be an object of execration and horror, a curse, a laughing-stock. 

Jer 44:13 I shall punish those who live in Egypt just as I punished Jerusalem: by sword, famine and plague. 

Jer 44:14 Of the remnant of Judah which has come to settle in Egypt, not a single one will escape or survive to 
return to the country of Judah where they long to return and live. For none of them will return, except a few 
refugees’”. 

Jer 44:15 At this, all the men who knew that their wives offered incense to other gods, and all the women who 
were standing there, a great crowd (and all the people living in Egypt, in Pathros), answered Jeremiah as 
follows, 

Jer 44:16 “We have no intention of listening to the word you have just spoken to us in Yahweh’s name, 

Jer 44:17 but intend to go on doing all we have vowed to do: offering incense to the Queen of Heaven and 
pouring libations in her honour, as we used to do, we and our ancestors, our kings and our chief men, in the 
towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem: we had food in plenty then, we lived well, we suffered no disasters. 
Jer 44:18 But since we gave up offering incense to the Queen of Heaven and pouring libations in her honour, 
we have been destitute and have perished either by sword or by famine. 

Jer 44:19 Besides, when we offer incense to the Queen of Heaven and pour libations in her honour, do you 
think we make cakes for her with her features on them, and pour libations to her, without our husbands’ 
knowledge?”. 

Jer 44:20 To all the people, men and women, all those who had made this answer, Jeremiah retorted, 

Jer 44:21 “The incense you offered in the towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem, you, your ancestors, 
your kings, your chief men and the people at large — was this not what Yahweh kept remembering, and found so 
repellent 

Jer 44:22 that Yahweh could not endure your misdeeds and your loathsome practices any longer, with the result 
that your country has become the uninhabited ruin, the object of horror and cursing it is today? 

Jer 44:23 Because you offered incense, because you sinned against Yahweh, refusing to listen to the voice of 
Yahweh, or to observe his Law, his statutes and his decrees — that is why the present disaster has overtaken 
you”. 

Jer 44:24 Further, Jeremiah said to all the people, and particularly to all the women, “Listen to the word of 
Yahweh, all you Judaeans in Egypt, 

Jer 44:25 Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this, ‘You and your wives, what your mouths promised, your 
hands have indeed performed! You said: We shall punctiliously fulfil the vows we have made and offer incense 
to the Queen of Heaven and pour libations in her honour. Very well, keep your vows, perform them punctiliously! 
Jer 44:26 But listen to the word of Yahweh, all you Judaeans living in Egypt: I swear by my great name, Yahweh 
says, that my name will no longer be uttered by any man of Judah throughout Egypt; no one will say: As Lord 
Yahweh lives. 

Jer 44:27 No, I am going to keep my eye on them for disaster, not for prosperity, and all the Judaeans in Egypt 
will perish either by the sword or by famine until they are wiped out. 

Jer 44:28 Yet, though few in number, those who escape the sword will return to the country of Judah from 
Egypt. Then the entire remnant of Judah which has come and settled in Egypt will know whose word comes true, 
mine or theirs. 

Jer 44:29 ‘And here is the sign for you, Yahweh declares, that I shall punish you in this place: so that you will 
know that the words with which I threaten you will come true: 

Jer 44:30 Yahweh says this: Look, I shall hand Pharaoh Hophra, king of Egypt, over to his enemies and to those 
determined to kill him, just as I handed Zedekiah king of Judah over to his enemy Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, who was determined to kill him’”. 

Jer 45:1 The word that the prophet Jeremiah addressed to Baruch son of Neriah when the latter wrote these 
words down in a book at Jeremiah’s dictation in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, 

Jer 45:2 “This is what Yahweh God of Israel says about you, Baruch! 

Jer 45:3 ‘You have been thinking: what disaster for me, and Yahweh has added further grief to my troubles! I 
am worn out with groaning, and find no relief!’. 

Jer 45:4 Say to him as follows, ‘Yahweh says this: Now I am knocking down what I have built, am uprooting 



what I have planted, over the whole country! 

Jer 45:5 And you ask for special treatment! Do not ask, for I am now going to bring disaster on all humanity, 
Yahweh declares, but you I shall allow to escape with your life, wherever you may go’”. 

Jer 46:1 The words of Yahweh that were addressed to the prophet Jeremiah against the nations. 

Jer 46:2 On Egypt. Against the army of Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt, which was at Carchemish on the River 
Euphrates when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon defeated it in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king 
of Judah. 

Jer 46:3 Buckler and shield at the ready! Onward to battle! 

Jer 46:4 Harness the horses: into the saddle, horsemen! To your ranks! On with your helmets! Sharpen your 
spears, put on your breastplates! 

Jer 46:5 Why do I see them retreating, panic-stricken? Their heroes, beaten back, are fleeing headlong, with not 
a look behind. Terror on every side, Yahweh declares! 

Jer 46:6 No flight for the swift, no escape for the strong! Up in the north on the River Euphrates, they have 
collapsed, have fallen. 

Jer 46:7 Who was it rose like the Nile, his waters foaming like a torrent? 

Jer 46:8 Why, Egypt rose like the Nile, his waters foaming like a torrent. “I shall rise”, he said, “and drown the 
earth; sweep away town and its inhabitants! 

Jer 46:9 Charge, horses! Forward, chariots! Let the warriors advance, men from Cush and Put with shield in 
hand, men from Lud who bend the bow!”. 

Jer 46:10 For this is the Day of Lord Yahweh Sabaoth, a day of vengeance when he takes revenge on his foes: 
the sword will devour until gorged, until drunk with their blood, for Lord Yahweh Sabaoth is holding a sacrificial 
feast in the land of the north, on the River Euphrates. 

Jer 46:1 1 Go up to Gilead and fetch balm, virgin daughter of Egypt! You multiply remedies in vain, nothing can 
cure you! 

Jer 46:12 The nations have heard of your shame, your wailing fills the world, for warrior has stumbled against 
warrior, and both have fallen together. 

Jer 46:13 The word that came from Yahweh to the prophet Jeremiah when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 
advanced to attack Egypt. 

Jer 46:14 Publish it in Egypt, proclaim it in Migdol, proclaim it in Noph and Tahpanhes! Say, “Stand your ground, 
be prepared, for the sword is devouring all round you!”. 

Jer 46:15 Why has Apis fled? Why has your Mighty One not stood firm? Why, Yahweh has overturned him, 

Jer 46:16 he has caused many to fall! Falling over one another, they say, “Up, and back to our own people, to 
the country where we were born, away from the devastating sword!”. 

Jer 46:17 They have given Pharaoh king of Egypt the nickname, “Much-noise-but-he-lets-the-chance-slip-by'! 

Jer 46:18 As I live, the King declares, whose name is Yahweh Sabaoth, he is coming, a very Tabor among 
mountains, a Carmel high above the sea! 

Jer 46:19 Get your bundle ready for exile, fair inhabitant of Egypt! Noph will be reduced to a desert, desolate, 
uninhabited. 

Jer 46:20 Egypt was a splendid heifer, but a gadfly from the north has settled on her. 

Jer 46:21 The mercenaries she had with her, these too were like fattened calves: but they too have taken to 
their heels, have all run away, not held their ground, for their day of disaster has overtaken them, their time for 
being punished. 

Jer 46:22 Hear her hissing like a snake as they advance in force to fall on her with their axes, like woodcutters, 
Jer 46:23 they will fell her forest, Yahweh declares, however impenetrable it was for they are more numerous 
than locusts, there is no counting them. 

Jer 46:24 The daughter of Egypt is put to shame, handed over to a people from the north. 

Jer 46:25 Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, has said, “Look, I shall punish Amon of No, Pharaoh, Egypt, its gods, 
its kings, Pharaoh and those who put their trust in him. 

Jer 46:26 I shall hand him over to those who are determined to kill him, to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, to 
his generals. But afterwards, Egypt will be inhabited again as in the past, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 46:27 But do not be afraid, my servant Jacob, Israel, do not be alarmed: for look, I shall rescue you from 
afar and your descendants from the country where they are captive. Jacob will return and be at peace, secure, 
with no one to trouble him. 

Jer 46:28 Do not be afraid, my servant Jacob, Yahweh declares, for I am with you: I shall make an end of all the 
nations where I have driven you, but I shall not make an end of you, I shall discipline you only as you deserve, 
not leaving you quite unpunished. 

Jer 47:1 The word of Yahweh that came to Jeremiah about the Philistines before Pharaoh attacked Gaza. 

Jer 47:2 “Yahweh says this: Look, the waters are rising from the north to become an overwhelming flood, 
overwhelming the country and all in it, the town and its inhabitants! People cry for help, and there is wailing from 



all the country’s inhabitants 

Jer 47:3 at the thunder of his chargers’ hoofs, the crash of his chariots, the grinding of his wheels. Fathers forget 
about their children, their hands fall limp 

Jer 47:4 because the day has come for all the Philistines to be destroyed, for Tyre and Sidon to be stripped to 
the last of their allies. Yes, Yahweh is destroying the Philistines, the remnant from the Isle of Caphtor. 

Jer 47:5 Baldness has befallen Gaza, Ashkelon has been reduced to silence. You who remain in the valley, how 
long will you gash yourselves? 

Jer 47:6 Oh, sword of Yahweh, how long before you rest? Back into your scabbard, stop, keep still! 

Jer 47:7 Yet how can it rest when Yahweh has given it an order, Ashkelon and the sea coast, the targets 
assigned to it? 

Jer 48:1 On Moab. Yahweh, God of Israel, says this: Wretched Nebo, for it has been ravaged, Kiriathaim has 
been shamed and taken, shame and distraction on the citadel, 

Jer 48:2 the pride of Moab is no more! At Heshbon they plotted her downfall, “Come, let us put an end to her as 
a nation!”. And you too, inhabitants of Madmen, will be silenced, the sword will be after you. 

Jer 48:3 A cry of agony goes up from Horonaim, “Devastation! Dire calamity. 

Jer 48:4 Moab has been shattered”, the agonised cries of her little ones ring out. 

Jer 48:5 Up the slope of Luhith, weeping they go. On the road down to Horonaim is heard the shriek of disaster, 
Jer 48:6 “Away! Flee for your lives like the wild donkey into the desert!”. 

Jer 48:7 Yes, since you relied on your deeds and your wealth, you will be captured too. Chemosh will go into 
exile, with all his priests and princes. 

Jer 48:8 The despoiler will descend on every town, not one will escape; the Valley will be ravaged, the Plain be 
plundered as Yahweh has said. 

Jer 48:9 Give Moab wings so that she can fly away, for her towns will be laid in ruins where no one will ever live 
again. 

Jer 48:10 (Accursed be he who does Yahweh’s work negligently! Accursed be he who deprives his sword of 
blood!) 

Jer 48:1 1 From his youth Moab lived at ease, he settled on his lees, never having been decanted, never having 
gone into exile: and so he kept his own flavour, his aroma was unchanged. 

Jer 48:12 And so the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall send him decanters to decant him; they 
will empty his pitchers and break his wine jars to bits. 

Jer 48:13 Moab will be shamed by Chemosh then, as the House of Israel was shamed by Bethel in which they 
put their trust. 

Jer 48:14 How can you say, “We are heroes, sturdy fighting men'? 

Jer 48:15 Moab has been ravaged, his cities scaled, the flower of his youth goes down to the slaughter, 
declares the King, whose name is Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Jer 48:16 Moab’s ruin is coming soon, his downfall comes at top speed. 

Jer 48:17 Grieve for him, all you living near him, all you who knew his name. Say, “How shattered it is, that 
mighty rod, that splendid sceptre!”. 

Jer 48:18 Come down from your glory, sit on the parched ground, daughter of Dibon, for the despoiler of Moab 
has advanced on you, he has destroyed your strongholds. 

Jer 48:19 Stand by the roadside, keep watch, daughter of Aroer. Question fugitive and runaway, ask, “What has 
happened?”. 

Jer 48:20 “Moab has been shattered and shamed. Wail and shriek! Shout along the Arnon, Moab has been laid 
waste!”. 

Jer 48:21 Judgement has also come on the Plain, on Holon, Jahzah, Mephaath, 

Jer 48:22 Dibon, Nebo, Beth-Diblathaim, 

Jer 48:23 Kiriathaim, Beth-Gamul, Beth-Meon, 

Jer 48:24 Kerioth, Bozrah, and all the towns of Moab, far and near. 

Jer 48:25 Moab’s horn has been cut off, his arm is broken, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 48:26 Make him drunk! He has set himself up against Yahweh; let Moab wallow in his vomit and become a 
laughing-stock in his turn. 

Jer 48:27 Was Israel not a laughing-stock to you? Was he caught red-handed with the thieves, for you to shake 
your head whenever you mention him? 

Jer 48:28 Leave the towns, make the rocks your home, inhabitants of Moab. Learn from the dove that makes its 
nest in the walls of the gaping gorge. 

Jer 48:29 We have heard about Moab’s pride, so very proud! What arrogance! What pride! What conceit! What 
a haughty heart! 

Jer 48:30 -I know all about his presumption, Yahweh declares, his empty boasting, those empty deeds of his! 

Jer 48:31 -and so I lament for Moab, for all Moab I raise my cry and mourn for the people of Kir-Heres. 



Jer 48:32 More than for Jazer I weep for you, vineyard of Sibmah: your shoots stretched beyond the sea, they 
reached all the way to Jazer. On your harvest and vintage the despoiler has descended. 

Jer 48:33 Gladness and joy have vanished from the orchards of Moab. I have dried up the wine in the presses, 
the treader of grapes treads no more, the joyful shouting has ceased. 

Jer 48:34 The cries of Heshbon and Elealeh can be heard as far as Jahaz. The shrieks resound from Zoar to 
Horonaim and Eglath-Shelishiyah, for even the Waters of Nimrim have become a wasteland. 

Jer 48:35 And in Moab I shall make an end, Yahweh declares, of anyone offering sacrifice on the high places 
and anyone offering incense to his gods. 

Jer 48:36 That is why my heart sobs like a flute for Moab, sobs like a flute for the people of Kir-Heres, since the 
wealth he had acquired is lost. 

Jer 48:37 Yes, every head is shaved, every beard cut off, gashes are on every hand, sackcloth round every 
waist. 

Jer 48:38 On all the housetops of Moab and in all its squares there is nothing but lamenting, for I have broken 
Moab like an unwanted pot, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 48:39 How shattered he is! Wail! Moab so shamefully in retreat! Moab has become a laughing-stock, a thing 
of horror to all his neighbours. 

Jer 48:40 For Yahweh says this: (Look, like an eagle, he will hover, spreading his wings over Moab.) 

Jer 48:41 The towns have been captured, the strongholds seized. (And the heart of Moab’s warriors, that day, 
will be like that of a woman in labour pains.) 

Jer 48:42 Moab will be destroyed, no longer a people, for setting itself up against Yahweh. 

Jer 48:43 Terror, the pit and the snare for you, inhabitant of Moab, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 48:44 And anyone who escapes from terror will fall into the pit, and anyone who climbs out of the pit will be 
caught in the snare. Yes, I shall bring all this on Moab when the year comes for punishing them, Yahweh 
declares. 

Jer 48:45 In the shelter of Heshbon the fugitives have paused, exhausted. But fire will burst from Heshbon, a 
flame from the palace of Sihon, consuming the brows of Moab, the head of a turbulent brood. 

Jer 48:46 Disaster for you, Moab! The people of Chemosh are lost! For your sons have been taken into exile 
and your daughters into captivity. 

Jer 48:47 But I shall bring back Moab’s captives in the final days, Yahweh declares. Thus far the judgement on 
Moab. 

Jer 49:1 To the Ammonites. Yahweh says this: Has Israel no sons? Has he no heir? Why should Milcom have 
inherited Gad and his people have settled in its towns? 

Jer 49:2 And so the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall make the war cry ring out for Rabbah-of- 
the-Ammonites. She will become a desolate mound and her daughter towns will be burnt down. Then Israel will 
inherit from his heirs, Yahweh says. 

Jer 49:3 Wail, Heshbon, for Ar has been laid waste! Shriek, daughters of Rabbah! Wrap yourself in sackcloth, 
raise the dirge, run to and fro among the sheep-pens! For Milcom is going into exile, with all his priests and 
princes. 

Jer 49:4 How you used to glory in your Valley, rebellious daughter, confident in your resources, “Who will dare to 
attack me?”. 

Jer 49:5 Look, I shall bring terror on you, Lord Yahweh Sabaoth declares, from all directions; you shall be driven 
away, everyone for himself, with no one to rally the fugitives. 

Jer 49:6 (But later I shall bring back the captive Ammonites, Yahweh declares.) 

Jer 49:7 To Edom. Yahweh says this: Is there no wisdom left in Teman? Have the shrewd run out of 
commonsense, has their wisdom vanished? 

Jer 49:8 Away! Take to your heels! Go into hiding, inhabitants of Dedan, for I shall bring ruin on Esau when the 
time comes for me to punish him. 

Jer 49:9 If grape-pickers were to come to you, would they not leave a few gleanings? If robbers came during the 
night, would they not steal only as much as they wanted? 

Jer 49:10 But I for my part have stripped Esau, have laid his hiding places bare: he can hide no longer. His race 
is destroyed, so are his brothers and neighbours; he is no more! 

Jer 49:1 1 Leave your orphans, I shall support them, and let your widows rely on me! 

Jer 49:12 For Yahweh says this, “Look, those who would not have had to drink the cup will have to drink it all the 
same; so why should you go unpunished? You will not go unpunished, but will certainly have to drink. 

Jer 49:13 For by my own self I have sworn, Yahweh declares, that Bozrah will become an object of horror, a 
laughing-stock, a desert, a curse, and all its towns ruins for ever”. 

Jer 49:14 I have received a message from Yahweh, a herald has been sent throughout the nations, “Muster! 
March against this people! Prepare for battle!”. 

Jer 49:15 For look, I shall reduce you to the smallest of nations, to the most despised of people. 



Jer 49:16 Your reputation for ferocity, your proud heart has misled you. You whose home is in the crannies of 
the Rock, who cling to the top of the peak! Though you make your nest as high as the eagle’s, I shall bring you 
down from there, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 49:17 Edom will become an object of horror; everyone going near will be appalled, and whistle at the sight of 
all her wounds. 

Jer 49:18 As at the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and their neighbouring towns, no one will live there any 
more, Yahweh says, no human being settle there again. 

Jer 49:19 Look, like a lion he climbs from the thickets of the Jordan to the perennial pasture! In a flash, I shall 
make them run away, and there appoint someöne I shall choose. For who is there like me? Who can hale me 
into court? Name me the shepherd who can stand up to me. 

Jer 49:20 So now hear the plan that Yahweh has laid against Edom, the schemes he has in mind against the 
inhabitants of Teman: they will certainly be dragged away like the smallest of the flock! Their pastures will 
certainly be sacked before their eyes! 

Jer 49:21 The earth quakes at the sound of their downfall, the sound of it echoes to the Sea of Reeds. 

Jer 49:22 Look, like an eagle, he will soar and hover, spreading his wings over Bozrah. And the heart of Edom’s 
warriors, that day, will be like that of a woman in labour pains. 

Jer 49:23 To Damascus. Hamath and Arpad are shamed, for they have heard bad news. They are convulsed 
with anxiety like the sea that cannot be calmed. 

Jer 49:24 Damascus is aghast, she prepares for flight, she is seized with trembling (anguish and sorrow have 
laid hold on her as on a woman in labour). 

Jer 49:25 What now! That famous town deserted, that city of gaiety? 

Jer 49:26 And so in her squares her young men will fall, and all her fighting men will perish, that day, Yahweh 
Sabaoth declares. 

Jer 49:27 I shall light a fire inside the walls of Damascus, to devour the palaces of Ben-Hadad. 

Jer 49:28 To Kedar and the kingdoms of Hazor, which were conquered by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. 
Yahweh says this: Up! March on Kedar, destroy the sons of the east! 

Jer 49:29 Let their tents and their flocks be captured, their tent-cloths and all their gear; let their camels be 
seized and the shout go up, “Terror on every side!”. 

Jer 49:30 Away! Get into hiding as fast as you can, inhabitants of Hazor, Yahweh declares, for Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon has made a plan against you, he has a scheme in mind against you, 

Jer 49:31 Up! March on a nation at its ease, living secure, Yahweh declares, that has no gates, no bars, that 
lives in a remote place! 

Jer 49:32 Their camels will be the plunder, their countless sheep the spoil. I shall scatter them to the winds, 
those Crop-Heads, and bring ruin on them from every side, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 49:33 Hazor will become the lair of jackals, desolate for ever. No one will live there any more, no human 
being settle there again. 

Jer 49:34 The word of Yahweh that came to the prophet Jeremiah about Elam, at the beginning of the reign of 
Zedekiah king of Judah. 

Jer 49:35 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Look, I shall break Elam’s bow, the source of his might. 

Jer 49:36 I shall bring four winds on Elam from the four corners of the sky, and I shall scatter them to all these 
winds: there will not be a single nation to which people expelled from Elam do not go. 

Jer 49:37 I shall make the Elamites tremble before their enemies, before those determined to kill them. I shall 
bring disaster on them, my burning anger, Yahweh declares. I shall pursue them with the sword until I have 
destroyed them all. 

Jer 49:38 I shall set up my throne in Elam, uprooting its king and princes, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 49:39 In the final days, I shall bring Elam’s captives back, Yahweh declares”. 

Jer 50:1 The word that Yahweh spoke against Babylon, against the country of the Chaldaeans, through the 
prophet Jeremiah. 

Jer 50:2 Announce it to the nations, proclaim it, hoist a signal and proclaim it, making no secret of it, say, 
“Babylon is captured, Bel disgraced, Marduk shattered. (Her idols are disgraced, her Obscenities shattered.)” 

Jer 50:3 For a nation is marching on her from the north, to turn her country into a desert: no one will live there 
any more; human and animal have fled and gone. 

Jer 50:4 In those days and at that time the people of Israel will return (they and the people of Judah); they will 
come weeping in search of Yahweh their God. 

Jer 50:5 They will ask the way to Zion and turn their faces towards her, “Come, let us bind ourselves to Yahweh 
by an everlasting covenant never to be forgotten!”. 

Jer 50:6 Lost sheep, such were my people; their shepherds led them astray, the mountains misled them; from 
mountain to hill they went, forgetful of their fold. 

Jer 50:7 Whoëver came across them devoured them, their enemies said, “We are not to blame, since they have 



sinned against Yahweh, the Home of Justice, against Yahweh, the Hope of their ancestors”. 

Jer 50:8 Escape from Babylon, leave the country of the Chaldaeans. Be like he-goats, leading the sheep! 

Jer 50:9 For look, I shall raise a league of mighty nations to attack Babylon, from the land of the north. They will 
take up position against her; by them she will be taken. Their arrows, like an experienced soldier’s, never return 
in vain. 

Jer 50:10 Chaldaea will be plundered, all her plunderers will be satisfied, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 50:1 1 Rejoice! Have your triumph, you plunderers of my heritage! Be playful like a heifer let out to grass! 
Neigh like stallions! 

Jer 50:12 But your mother is covered with shame, disgraced is the woman who bore you; she is the least of 
nations now; a desert, a parched land, a wasteland. 

Jer 50:13 Because of Yahweh’s anger, no one will live there any more, she will become a total solitude. All who 
pass by Babylon will be appalled and whistle at the sight of all her wounds. 

Jer 50:14 Take position against Babylon, surround her, all you who bend the bow. Shoot at her! Do not spare 
your arrows, for she has sinned against Yahweh! 

Jer 50:15 Raise the war cry against her from all sides. She surrenders! Her bastions fall! Her walls collapse! 

This is Yahweh’s vengeance! Take revenge on her. Treat her as she has treated others. 

Jer 50:16 Deprive Babylon of the man who sows, of the man who wields the sickle at harvest. Away from the 
devastating sword, let everyone return to his own people, let everyone flee to his own country! 

Jer 50:17 Israel was a straying sheep pursued by lions. First, the king of Assyria devoured him, and latterly 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon crunched his bones. 

Jer 50:18 So Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel, says this: Look, I shall punish the king of Babylon and his country 
as I punished the king of Assyria. 

Jer 50:19 I will bring Israel back to his pastures to browse on Carmel and in Bashan, on the highlands of 
Ephraim and in Gilead, and he will be satisfied. 

Jer 50:20 In those days and at that time, Yahweh declares, you may look for Israel’s guilt, it will not be there, for 
Judah’s sins, you will not find them, for I shall pardon the remnant that I leave. 

Jer 50:21 March on the country of Merathaim, march on it and on the inhabitants of Pekod; slaughter and curse 
with destruction every last one of them, Yahweh declares, carry out my orders to the letter! 

Jer 50:22 The din of battle fills the country, immense destruction. 

Jer 50:23 How utterly shattered that hammer of the whole world! What a thing of horror Babylon has become 
throughout the nations! 

Jer 50:24 I set a snare for you, Babylon; you were caught before you knew it. You have been found and 
overpowered for having defied Yahweh. 

Jer 50:25 Yahweh has opened his armoury and taken out the weapons of his fury. For Lord Yahweh Sabaoth 
has work to do in the country of the Chaldaeans. 

Jer 50:26 Fall on her from every side, open her granaries, pile her in heaps, curse her with destruction, until 
nothing is left of her. 

Jer 50:27 Slaughter all her bulls, down to the slaughterhouse with them! Disaster on them, their day has come, 
their time for being punished. 

Jer 50:28 Listen! Fugitives and runaways from the country of Babylon arrive in Zion and proclaim the revenge of 
Yahweh our God, revenge for his Temple! 

Jer 50:29 Call up the archers against Babylon! All you who bend the bow, invest her on all sides, leave her no 
way of escape. Repay her as her deeds deserve; treat her as she has treated others, for she was arrogant to 
Yahweh, to the Holy One of Israel. 

Jer 50:30 And so in her squares her young men will fall, and all her fighting men will perish, that day, Yahweh 
declares. 

Jer 50:31 My quarrel is with you, “Arrogance!”. Lord Yahweh Sabaoth declares, your day has come, the time for 
me to punish you. 

Jer 50:32 “Arrogance” will stumble, she will fall, no one will lift her up: I shall set fire to her towns and it will 
devour all around it. 

Jer 50:33 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: The people of Israel are oppressed (and the people of Judah too), all their 
captors hold them fast, they will not let them go. 

Jer 50:34 But their redeemer is strong: Yahweh Sabaoth is his name. He will take up their cause, to give our 
country rest but make the inhabitants of Babylon tremble. 

Jer 50:35 A sword against the Chaldaeans, Yahweh declares, against the inhabitants of Babylon, against her 
princes and her sages! 

Jer 50:36 A sword against her diviners: may they lose their wits! A sword against her warriors: may they panic! 
Jer 50:37 A sword against her horses, her chariots and the conglomeration of people inside her: may they be 
like women! A sword against her treasures: may they be plundered! 



Jer 50:38 Drought on her waters: may they dry up! For it is a country of idols, and they are mad about those 
bogeys of theirs! 

Jer 50:39 Hence wild cats and jackals will live there, and ostriches make their home there. She will never again 
be inhabited, for ever, but remain uninhabited age after age. 

Jer 50:40 As when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and their neighbouring towns, Yahweh declares, no 
one will live there any more, no human being settle there again. 

Jer 50:41 Look, a people is coming from the north, a mighty nation; from the far ends of the earth many kings 
are stirring. 

Jer 50:42 They are armed with bow and spear, they are cruel and pitiless; their noise is like the roaring of the 
sea; they ride horses, ready as one man to fight you, daughter of Babylon! 

Jer 50:43 The king of Babylon has heard the news, his hands fall limp, anguish has seized him, pain like that of 
a woman in labour. 

Jer 50:44 Look, like a lion he climbs the thickets of the Jordan to the perennial pasture! In a flash I shall make 
them run away and there appoint someöne I shall choose. For who is there like me? Who can hale me into 
court? Name me the shepherd who can stand up to me. 

Jer 50:45 So now hear the plan that Yahweh has laid against Babylon, the schemes he has in mind against the 
country of the Chaldaeans: they will certainly be dragged away like the smallest in the flock! Their pastures will 
certainly be sacked before their eyes! 

Jer 50:46 The earth quakes at the sound of Babylon’s capture, and the shouting echoes through the nations. 
Jer 51:1 Yahweh says this: Against Babylon and the inhabitants of Leb-Kamai I shall rouse a destructive wind. 
Jer 51 :2 I shall send winnowers to Babylon to winnow her and leave her country bare, for she will be 
beleaguered on all sides, on the day of disaster. 

Jer 51 :3 Let no archer bend his bow! Let no man swagger in his breastplate!-No quarter for her young men! 
Curse her whole army with destruction! 

Jer 51 :4 In the country of the Chaldaeans the slaughtered will fall, in the streets of Babylon, those run through 
by the sword. 

Jer 51 :5 For Israel and Judah have not been bereft of their God, Yahweh Sabaoth, although their country was 
full of sin against the Holy One of Israel. 

Jer 51 :6 Escape from Babylon (save your lives, each one of you); do not perish for her guilt, for now is the time 
for Yahweh’s vengeance: he will pay her her reward! 

Jer 51 :7 Babylon was a golden cup in Yahweh’s hand, she made the whole world drunk, the nations drank her 
wine and then went mad. 

Jer 51 :8 Babylon has suddenly fallen, is broken: wail for her! Fetch balm for her wounds, perhaps she can be 
cured! 

Jer 51 :9 -'We tried to cure Babylon; she has got no better. Leave her alone and let us each go to his own 
country”. -Yes, her sentence reaches to the sky, rises to the very clouds. 

Jer 51:10 Yahweh has shown the uprightness of our cause. Come, let us tell in Zion what Yahweh our God has 
done. 

Jer 51:11 Sharpen the arrows, fill the quivers! Yahweh has roused the spirit of the kings of the Medes, because 
he has a plan against Babylon to destroy it; this is Yahweh’s revenge, revenge for his Temple. 

Jer 51:12 Against the walls of Babylon raise the standard! Strengthen the guard! Post the sentries! Take up 
concealed positions! For Yahweh has both planned and done what he promised he would to the inhabitants of 
Babylon. 

Jer 51:13 Enthroned beside abundant waters, rich in treasures, you now meet your end, the finish of your 
pillaging. 

Jer 51:14 By his own self Yahweh Sabaoth has sworn: I shall fill you with men as though with grasshoppers, 
and over you they will raise the triumph-shout. 

Jer 51:15 By his power he made the earth, by his wisdom set the world firm, by his discernment spread out the 
heavens. 

Jer 51:16 When he thunders there is a roaring of waters in heaven; he raises clouds from the furthest limits of 
the earth, makes the lightning flash for the downpour, and brings the wind from his storehouse. 

Jer 51:17 At this everyone stands stupefied, uncomprehending, every goldsmith blushes for his idols; his 
castings are but delusion, with no breath in them. 

Jer 51:18 They are futile, a laughable production, when the time comes for them to be punished, they will 
vanish. 

Jer 51:19 The Heritage of Jacob is not like these, for he is the maker of everything, and Israel is the tribe that is 
his heritage; His name is Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Jer 51:20 You were my mace, a weapon of war. With you I crushed nations, struck kingdoms down, 

Jer 51 :21 with you crushed horse and rider, with you crushed chariot and charioteer, 



Jer 51 :22 with you crushed man and woman, with you crushed old man and young, with you crushed young 
man and girl, 

Jer 51 :23 with you crushed shepherd and flock, with you crushed ploughman and team, with you crushed 
governors and magistrates, 

Jer 51 :24 and I shall repay Babylon and the inhabitants of Chaldaea, before your eyes, for all the wrongs they 
have done to Zion, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 51 :25 I am setting myself against you, mountain of destruction, Yahweh declares, destroyer of the whole 
world! I shall reach out my hand for you and send you tumbling from the crags and make you a burnt-out 
mountain. 

Jer 51 :26 No corner-stone will be taken from you again and no foundation-stone, for you will be a desert for 
ever, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 51 :27 Raise the standard throughout the world, sound the trumpet among the nations! Consecrate nations 
to make war on her; summon kingdoms against her: Ararat, Minni, Ashkenaz; appoint a recruiting-officer for her 
enemies, bring up the cavalry, bristling like locusts. 

Jer 51 :28 Consecrate nations to make war on her: the kings of Media, her governors, all her magistrates and 
the whole territory under their rule. 

Jer 51 :29 Then the earth trembled and writhed, for Yahweh’s plan against Babylon was being executed: to 
change the country of Babylon into an unpopulated desert. 

Jer 51 :30 The warriors of Babylon have done with fighting, they have stayed inside their fortresses; their 
courage exhausted, they are now like women. Her houses are on fire, her gates are shattered. 

Jer 51 :31 Courier follows close on courier, messenger on messenger, to tell the king of Babylon that his city has 
been taken from all sides, 

Jer 51 :32 the fords occupied, the bastions burnt down and the fighting men seized with panic. 

Jer 51 :33 For Yahweh Sabaoth, the God of Israel, says this: the daughter of Babylon is like a threshing-floor 
when it is being trodden: a little while, and then the time for harvesting her will come. 

Jer 51 :34 He devoured me, consumed me, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, left me like an empty dish, like the 
Dragon he has swallowed me whole, filled his belly with my titbits and threw me out. 

Jer 51 :35 “On Babylon be the wounds I suffered!”. the daughter of Zion will say. “On the inhabitants of Chaldaea 
be my blood!”. Jerusalem will say. 

Jer 51 :36 So, Yahweh says this: Look, I am taking up your cause to make sure you are avenged. I shall dry her 
river up, make her springs run dry. 

Jer 51 :37 Babylon will become a heap of stones, the lair of jackals, a thing of horror and of scorn, with no one 
living in it. 

Jer 51 :38 Like lions they roar together, they growl like lions’ whelps. 

Jer 51 :39 Are they feverish? I will prepare them a drink and make them drink until they are tipsy and fall into an 
everlasting sleep, never to wake again, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 51 :40 I will drag them away to the slaughterhouse like lambs, like rams and goats. 

Jer 51 :41 What! Has Sheshak been taken, been conquered, the pride of the whole world? What a thing of horror 
Babylon has become throughout the nations! 

Jer 51 :42 The sea has risen over Babylon, she sinks beneath its boisterous waves. 

Jer 51 :43 Her towns have been turned into wasteland, a parched land, a desert, a country where no one lives 
and where nobody goes. 

Jer 51 :44 I shall punish Bel in Babylon and make him disgorge what he has swallowed. In future the nations will 
stream to him no more. The very walls of Babylon will fall. 

Jer 51 :45 Get out of her, my people; save your lives, each one of you, from Yahweh’s furious anger. 

Jer 51 :46 But do not be faint-hearted! Do not take fright at rumours hawked round the country: one rumour 
spreads one year, next year another follows; violence rules on earth and one tyrant succeeds another. 

Jer 51 :47 So look, the days are coming when I shall punish the idols of Babylon. Her entire country will be 
humbled, with all her slaughtered lying on home-soil. 

Jer 51 :48 The heaven and earth and all within them will shout for joy over Babylon, for the destroyers from the 
north are coming to her, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 51 :49 Babylon in her turn must fall, you slaughtered ones of Israel, just as through Babylon there fell men 
slaughtered all over the world. 

Jer 51 :50 You who have escaped her sword, leave her, do not wait! Remember Yahweh from afar, let 
Jerusalem come into your mind. 

Jer 51 :51 -'We were ashamed when we heard of the outrage, we were covered in confusion because foreigners 
had entered the Temple of Yahweh’s holy places”. 

Jer 51 :52 -So look, the days are coming, Yahweh declares, when I shall punish her idols, and the wounded will 
groan throughout her country. 



Jer 51 :53 Were Babylon to scale the heavens or reinforce her towering citadel, destroyers would still come to 
her on my orders, Yahweh declares. 

Jer 51 :54 The din of shouting from Babylon, of immense destruction, from the country of the Chaldaeans! 

Jer 51 :55 Yes, Yahweh is laying Babylon waste and silencing her monstrous din, whose waves used to roar like 
the ocean and their tumultuous voices rang out. 

Jer 51 :56 For the destroyer has fallen on Babylon, her warriors are captured, their bows are broken. Yes, 
Yahweh is a God of retribution, he never fails to repay. 

Jer 51 :57 I shall make her princes and her sages drink, her governors, her magistrates, her warriors; they will 
fall into an everlasting sleep, never to wake again, declares the King, whose name is Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Jer 51 :58 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: The walls of Babylon the Great will be rased to the ground, and her lofty 
gates will be burnt down. Thus peoples toil for nothing and nations wear themselves out, for the flames. 

Jer 51 :59 This is the order that the prophet Jeremiah gave to Seraiah son of Neriah, son of Mahseiah when 
Seraiah left for Babylon with Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year of his reign. Seraiah was lord 
chamberlain. 

Jer 51 :60 Now, on one sheet, Jeremiah had written down the entire disaster that was to befall Babylon, that is, 
all these words recorded here against Babylon. 

Jer 51 :61 Jeremiah then said to Seraiah, “When you reach Babylon, see to it that you read all these words 
aloud. 

Jer 51 :62 Then say, ‘You, Yahweh, have promised to destroy this place, so that no one will live here ever again, 
neither human nor animal, and it will be desolate for ever’. 

Jer 51 :63 Then, when you have finished reading this sheet, tie a stone to it and throw it into the middle of the 
Euphrates, 

Jer 51 :64 with the words, ‘So shall Babylon sink, never to rise again from the disaster which I am going to bring 
on her’. 1 Thus far the words of Jeremiah. 

Jer 52:1 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned for eleven years in 
Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamital daughter of Jeremiah, of Libnah. 

Jer 52:2 He did what is displeasing to Yahweh, just as Jehoiakim had done. 

Jer 52:3 That this should happen to Jerusalem and Judah was due to Yahweh’s anger, resulting in his casting 
them away from his presence. Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon. 

Jer 52:4 In the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon advanced on Jerusalem with his entire army; he pitched camp in front of the city and threw up 
earthworks round it. 

Jer 52:5 The city lay under siege till the eleventh year of King Zedekiah. 

Jer 52:6 In the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, when famine was raging in the city and there was no 
food for the populace, 

Jer 52:7 a breach was made in the city wall. The king and all the fighting men then fled, leaving the city under 
cover of dark, by way of the gate between the two walls, which is near the king’s garden — the Chaldaeans had 
surrounded the city — and made his way towards the Arabah. 

Jer 52:8 The Chaldaean troops pursued the king and caught up with Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, where all 
his troops deserted. 

Jer 52:9 But the Chaldaeans captured the king and took him to the king of Babylon at Riblah in the territory of 
Hamath, where he passed sentence on him. 

Jer 52:10 He had Zedekiah’s sons slaughtered before his eyes; he also had all the chief men of Judah put to 
death at Riblah. 

Jer 52:1 1 He then put out Zedekiah’s eyes and, loading him with chains, the king of Babylon carried him off to 
Babylon where he kept him prisoner until his dying day. 

Jer 52:12 In the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month — it was in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon — Nebuzaradan commander of the guard, a member of the king of Babylon’s staff, entered 
Jerusalem. 

Jer 52:13 He burnt down the Temple of Yahweh, the royal palace and all the houses in Jerusalem. 

Jer 52:14 The Chaldaean troops who accompanied the commander of the guard demolished all the walls 
surrounding Jerusalem. 

Jer 52:15 Nebuzaradan commander of the guard deported (some of the poor people and) the remainder of the 
population left in the city, the deserters who had gone over to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the artisans. 

Jer 52:16 But Nebuzaradan commander of the guard left some of the poor country-people behind as vineyard 
workers and ploughmen. 

Jer 52:17 The Chaldaeans broke up the bronze pillars from the Temple of Yahweh, the wheeled stands and the 
bronze Sea, which were in the Temple of Yahweh, and took all the bronze away to Babylon. 

Jer 52:18 They also took the ash containers, the scoops, the knives, the sprinkling bowls, the incense bowls, 



and all the bronze furnishings used in worship. 

Jer 52:19 The commander of the guard also took the bowls, the censers, the sprinkling bowls, the ash 
containers, the lamp-stands, the goblets and the saucers: everything that was made of gold and everything 
made of silver. 

Jer 52:20 As regards the two pillars, the one Sea, the twelve bronze oxen supporting the Sea, and the wheeled 
stands, which King Solomon had made for the Temple of Yahweh, there was no reckoning the weight of bronze 
in all these objects. 

Jer 52:21 As regards the pillars, the height of one pillar was eighteen cubits, its circumference was twelve 
cubits, it was four fingers thick, and hollow inside; 

Jer 52:22 on it stood a capital of bronze, the height of the capital being five cubits; round the capital were filigree 
and pomegranates, all in bronze. So also for the second pillar. 

Jer 52:23 There were ninety-six pomegranates round the sides, making a hundred pomegranates round the 
filigree in all. 

Jer 52:24 The commander of the guard took prisoner Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the priest next in rank, 
and the three guardians of the threshold. 

Jer 52:25 In the city he took prisoner an official who was in command of the fighting men, seven of the king’s 
personal friends who were discovered in the city, the secretary to the army commander responsible for military 
conscription, and sixty men of distinction discovered in the city. 

Jer 52:26 Nebuzaradan commander of the guard took these men and brought them to the king of Babylon at 
Riblah, 

Jer 52:27 and at Riblah, in the territory of Hamath, the king of Babylon had them put to death. Thus Judah was 
deported from its country. 

Jer 52:28 The number of people deported by Nebuchadnezzar was as follows. In the seventh year: three 
thousand and twenty-three Judaeans; 

Jer 52:29 in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, eight hundred and thirty-two persons were deported from 
Jerusalem; 

Jer 52:30 in the twenty-third year of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuzaradan commander of the guard deported seven 
hundred and forty-five Judaeans. In all: four thousand six hundred persons. 

Jer 52:31 But in the thirty-seventh year of the exile of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the 
twenty-fifth day of the month, Evil-Merodach king of Babylon, in the year he came to the throne, pardoned 
Jehoiachin king of Judah and released him from prison. 

Jer 52:32 He treated him kindly and allotted him a seat above those of the other kings who were with him in 
Babylon. 

Jer 52:33 So Jehoiachin laid aside his prisoner’s garb and for the rest of his life always ate at the king’s table. 
Jer 52:34 And his upkeep was permanently ensured by the king, day after day, for the rest of his life until the 
day he died. 

Lam 1:1 How deserted she sits, the city once thronged with people! Once the greatest of nations, she is now 
like a widow. Once the princess of states, she is now put to forced labour. 

Lam 1 :2 All night long she is weeping, tears running down her cheeks. Not one of all her lovers remains to 
comfort her. Her friends have all betrayed her and become her enemies. 

Lam 1:3 Judah has gone into exile after much pain and toil. Living among the nations she finds no respite; her 
persecutors all overtake her where there is no way out. 

Lam 1 :4 The roads to Zion are in mourning; no one comes to her festivals now. Her gateways are all deserted; 
her priests groan; her young girls are grief-stricken; she suffers bitterly. 

Lam 1 :5 Her foes now have the upper hand, her enemies prosper, for Yahweh has made her suffer for her 
many, many crimes; her children have gone away into captivity driven in front of the oppressor. 

Lam 1:6 And from the daughter of Zion all her splendour has departed. Her princes were like stags which could 
find no pasture, exhausted, as they flee before the hunter. 

Lam 1 :7 Jerusalem remembers her days of misery and distress; when her people fell into the enemy’s clutches 
there was no one to help her. Her enemies looked on and laughed at her downfall. 

Lam 1 :8 Jerusalem has sinned so gravely that she has become a thing unclean. All who used to honour her 
despise her, having seen her nakedness; she herself groans aloud and turns her face away. 

Lam 1 :9 Her filth befouls her skirts — she never thought to end like this, and hence her astonishing fall with no 
one to comfort her. Yahweh, look at my misery, for the enemy is triumphant! 

Lam 1:10 The enemy stretched out his hand for everything she treasured; she saw the heathen enter her 
sanctuary, whom you had forbidden to enter your Assembly. 

Lam 1:11 All her people are groaning, looking for something to eat; they have bartered their treasures for food, 
to keep themselves alive. Look, Yahweh, and consider how despised I am! 

Lam 1:12 All you who pass this way, look and see: is any sorrow like the sorrow inflicted on me, with which 



Yahweh struck me on the day of his burning anger? 

Lam 1:13 He sent fire from on high deep into my bones; he stretched a net for my feet, he pulled me back; he 
left me shattered, sick all day long. 

Lam 1:14 He has watched out for my offences, with his hand he enmeshes me, his yoke is on my neck, he has 
deprived me of strength. The Lord has put me into clutches which I am helpless to resist. 

Lam 1:15 The Lord has rejected all my warriors within my walls, he has summoned a host against me to crush 
my young men; in the winepress the Lord trampled the young daughter of Judah. 

Lam 1:16 And that is why I weep; my eyes stream with water, since a comforter who could revive me is far 
away. My children are shattered, for the enemy has proved too strong. 

Lam 1:17 Zion stretches out her hands, with no one to comfort her. Yahweh has commanded Jacob’s enemies 
to surround him; they treat Jerusalem as though she were unclean. 

Lam 1:18 Yahweh is in the right, for I rebelled against his command. Listen, all you peoples, and see my sorrow. 
My young girls and my young men have gone into captivity. Qophp 

Lam 1:19 I called to my lovers; they failed me. My priests and my elders expired in the city, as they searched for 
food to keep themselves alive. 

Lam 1:20 Look, Yahweh. I am in distress! My inmost being is in ferment; my heart turns over inside me — how 
rebellious I have been! Outside, the sword bereaves; inside it is like death. 

Lam 1 :21 Listen, for I am groaning, with no one to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of my disaster, they 
are glad about what you have done. Bring the Day you once foretold, so that they may be like me! 

Lam 1 :22 Let all their wickedness come before you, and treat them as you have treated me for all my crimes; 
numberless are my groans, and I am sick at heart. 

Lam 2:1 In his anger, with what darkness has the Lord enveloped the daughter of Zion! He has flung the beauty 
of Israel from heaven to the ground, without regard for his footstool on the day of his anger. 

Lam 2:2 The Lord pitilessly engulfed all the homes of Jacob; in his fury he tore down the fortresses of the 
daughter of Judah; he threw to the ground, he desecrated the kingdom and its princes. 

Lam 2:3 In his burning anger he broke all the might of Israel, withdrew his protecting right hand at the coming of 
the enemy, and blazed against Jacob like a fire that burns up everything near it. 

Lam 2:4 Like an enemy he bent his bow, and his right hand held firm; like a foe he slaughtered all those who 
were a delight to see; on the tent of the daughter of Zion he poured out his fury like fire. 

Lam 2:5 The Lord behaved like an enemy; he engulfed Israel, he engulfed all its citadels, he destroyed its 
fortresses and for the daughter of Judah multiplied weeping on wailing. 

Lam 2:6 He wrecked his domain like a garden, destroyed his assembly-points, Yahweh erased the memory of 
festivals and Sabbaths in Zion; in the heat of his anger he treated king and priest with contempt. 

Lam 2:7 The Lord has rejected his altar, he has come to loathe his sanctuary and has given her palace walls 
into the clutches of the enemy; from the uproar they made in Yahweh’s temple it might have been a festival day! 
Lam 2:8 Yahweh has resolved to destroy the walls of the daughter of Zion, stretching out the line, not staying 
his hand until he has engulfed everything, thus bringing mourning on wall and rampart; alike they crumbled. 

Lam 2:9 Her gates have sunk into the ground; he has broken and shattered their bars. Her king and her princes 
are among the gentiles, there is no instruction, furthermore her prophets cannot find any vision from Yahweh. 
Lam 2:10 Mute, they sit on the ground, the elders of the daughter of Zion; they have put dust on their heads and 
wrapped themselves in sackcloth. The young girls of Jerusalem bow their heads to the ground. 

Lam 2:1 1 My eyes are worn out with weeping, my inmost being is in ferment, my heart plummets at the 
destruction of my young people, as the children and babies grow faint in the streets of the city. 

Lam 2:12 They keep saying to their mothers, “Where is some food?”. as they faint like wounded men in the 
streets of the city, as they breathe their last on their mothers’ breasts. 

Lam 2:13 To what can I compare or liken you, daughter of Jerusalem? Who can rescue and comfort you, young 
daughter of Zion? For huge as the sea is your ruin: who can heal you? 

Lam 2:14 The visions your prophets had for you were deceptive whitewash; they did not lay bare your guilt so 
as to change your fortunes: the visions they told you were deceptive. 

Lam 2:15 All who pass your way clap their hands at the sight; they whistle and shake their heads over the 
daughter of Jerusalem, “Is this the city they call Perfection of Beauty, the joy of the whole world?”. 

Lam 2:16 Your enemies open their mouths in chorus against you; they whistle and grind their teeth; they say, 
“We have swallowed her up. This is the day we were waiting for; at last we have seen it!”. 

Lam 2:17 Yahweh has done what he planned, has carried out his threat, as he ordained long ago: he has 
destroyed without pity, increasing the might of your foes — and letting your foes get the credit. 

Lam 2:18 Cry then to the Lord, rampart of the daughter of Zion; let your tears flow like a torrent, day and night; 
allow yourself no respite, give your eyes no rest! 

Lam 2:19 Up, cry out in the night-time as each watch begins! Pour your heart out like water in Yahweh’s 
presence! Raise your hands to him for the lives of your children (who faint with hunger at the end of every 



street)! 

Lam 2:20 Look, Yahweh, and consider: whom have you ever treated like this? Should women eat their little 
ones, the children they have nursed? Should priest and prophet be slaughtered in the Lord’s sanctuary? 

Lam 2:21 Children and old people are lying on the ground in the streets; my young men and young girls have 
fallen by the sword; you have killed them, on the day of your anger, you have slaughtered them pitilessly. 

Lam 2:22 As though to a festival you called together terrors from all sides, so that, on the day of Yahweh’s 
anger, none escaped and none survived. Those whom I had nursed and reared, my enemy has annihilated them 
all. 

Lam 3:1 I am the man familiar with misery under the rod of his fury. 

Lam 3:2 He has led and guided me into darkness, not light. 

Lam 3:3 Against none but me does he turn his hand, again and again, all day. 

Lam 3:4 He has wasted my flesh and skin away, has broken my bones. 

Lam 3:5 He has besieged me and made hardship a circlet round my head. 

Lam 3:6 He has forced me to dwell where all is dark, like those long-dead in their everlasting home. 

Lam 3:7 He has walled me in so that I cannot escape; he has weighed me down with chains; 

Lam 3:8 even when I shout for help, he shuts out my prayer. 

Lam 3:9 He has closed my way with blocks of stone, he has obstructed my paths. 

Lam 3:10 For me he is a lurking bear, a lion in hiding. 

Lam 3:1 1 Heading me off, he has torn me apart, leaving me shattered. 

Lam 3:12 He has bent his bow and used me as a target for his arrows. 

Lam 3:13 He has shot deep into me with shafts from his quiver. 

Lam 3:14 I have become a joke to all my own people, their refrain all day long. 

Lam 3:15 He has given me my fill of bitterness, he has made me drunk with wormwood. 

Lam 3:16 He has broken my teeth with gravel, he has fed me on ashes. 

Lam 3:17 I have been deprived of peace, I have forgotten what happiness is 
Lam 3:18 and thought, “My lasting hope in Yahweh is lost”. 

Lam 3:19 Bring to mind my misery and anguish; it is wormwood and gall! 

Lam 3:20 My heart dwells on this continually and sinks within me. 

Lam 3:21 This is what I shall keep in mind and so regain some hope: 

Lam 3:22 Surely Yahweh’s mercies are not over, his deeds of faithful love not exhausted; 

Lam 3:23 every morning they are renewed; great is his faithfulness! 

Lam 3:24 “Yahweh is all I have”, I say to myself, “and so I shall put my hope in him”. 

Lam 3:25 Yahweh is good to those who trust him, to all who search for him. 

Lam 3:26 It is good to wait in silence for Yahweh to save. 

Lam 3:27 It is good for someöne to bear the yoke from a young age, 

Lam 3:28 to sit in solitude and silence when it weighs heavy, 

Lam 3:29 to lay one’s head in the dust — maybe there is hope- 

Lam 3:30 to offer one’s cheek to the striker, to have one’s fill of disgrace! 

Lam 3:31 For the Lord will not reject anyone for ever. 

Lam 3:32 If he brings grief, he will have pity out of the fullness of his faithful love, 

Lam 3:33 for it is not for his own pleasure that he torments and grieves the human race. 

Lam 3:34 When all the prisoners in a country are crushed underfoot, 

Lam 3:35 when human rights are overridden in defiance of the Most High, 

Lam 3:36 when someöne is cheated of justice, does not the Lord see it? 

Lam 3:37 Who has only to speak and it is so done? Who commands, if not the Lord? 

Lam 3:38 From where, if not from the mouth of the Most High, do evil and good come? 

Lam 3:39 Why then should anyone complain? Better to be bold against one’s sins. 

Lam 3:40 Let us examine our path, let us ponder it and return to Yahweh. 

Lam 3:41 Let us raise our hearts and hands to God in heaven. 

Lam 3:42 We are the ones who have sinned, who have rebelled, and you have not forgiven. 

Lam 3:43 You have enveloped us in anger, pursuing us, slaughtering without pity. 

Lam 3:44 You have wrapped yourself in a cloud too thick for prayer to pierce. 

Lam 3:45 You have reduced us to rubbish and refuse among the nations. 

Lam 3:46 Our enemies open their mouths in chorus against us. 

Lam 3:47 Terror and pitfall have been our lot, ravage and ruin. 

Lam 3:48 My eyes dissolve in torrents of tears at the ruin of my beloved people. 

Lam 3:49 My eyes will weep ceaselessly, without relief, 

Lam 3:50 until Yahweh looks down and sees from heaven. 

Lam 3:51 My eyes have grown sore over all the daughters of my city. 



Lam 3:52 Unprovoked, my enemies hunted me down like a bird. 

Lam 3:53 They shut me finally in a pit, they closed me in with a stone. 

Lam 3:54 The waters rose over my head; I thought, “I am lost!”. 

Lam 3:55 Yahweh, I called on your name from the deep pit. 

Lam 3:56 You heard my voice, do not close your ear to my prayer, to my cry. 

Lam 3:57 You are near when I call to you. You said, “Do not be afraid!”. 

Lam 3:58 Lord, you defended my cause, you have redeemed my life. 

Lam 3:59 Yahweh, you have seen the wrong done to me, grant me redress. 

Lam 3:60 You have seen their vindictiveness, all their plots against me. 

Lam 3:61 You have heard their insults, Yahweh, all their plots against me, 

Lam 3:62 the whispering and murmuring of my enemies against me all day long. 

Lam 3:63 Look, whether they sit or stand, I am their refrain. 

Lam 3:64 Yahweh, repay them as their deeds deserve. 

Lam 3:65 Lay hardness of heart as your curse on them. 

Lam 3:66 Angrily pursue them, root them out from under your heavens! 

Lam 4:1 How the gold has tarnished, how the fine gold has changed! The sacred stones lie scattered at the 
corner of every street. 

Lam 4:2 The children of Zion, as precious as finest gold — to think that they should now be reckoned like 
crockery made by a potter! 

Lam 4:3 The very jackals give the breast, and suckle their young: but the daughter of my people is as cruel as 
the ostriches of the desert. 

Lam 4:4 The tongue of the baby at the breast sticks to its palate for thirst; little children ask for bread, no one 
gives them any. 

Lam 4:5 Those who used to eat only the best, now lie dying in the streets; those who were reared in the purple 
claw at the rubbish heaps, 

Lam 4:6 for the wickedness of the daughter of my people exceeded the sins of Sodom, which was overthrown in 
a moment without a hand being laid on it. 

Lam 4:7 Once her young people were brighter than snow, whiter than milk; rosier than coral their bodies, their 
hue like sapphire. 

Lam 4:8 Now their faces are blacker than soot, they are not recognised in the streets, the skin has shrunk over 
their bones, as dry as a stick. 

Lam 4:9 Happier those killed by the sword than those killed by famine: they waste away, sunken for lack of the 
fruits of the earth. 

Lam 4:10 With their own hands, kindly women cooked their children; this was their food when the daughter of 
my people was ruined. 

Lam 4:1 1 Yahweh indulged his fury, he vented his fierce anger, he lit a fire in Zion which devoured her 
foundations. 

Lam 4:12 The kings of the earth never believed, nor did any of the inhabitants of the world, that foe or enemy 
would ever penetrate the gates of Jerusalem. 

Lam 4:13 Owing to the sins of her prophets and the crimes of her priests, who had shed the blood of the upright, 
in the heart of the city, 

Lam 4:14 they wandered blindly through the streets, polluted with blood, so that no one dared to touch their 
clothes. 

Lam 4:15 “Keep away! Unclean!”. people shouted, “Keep away! Keep away! Don’t touch!”. If they left and fled to 
the nations, they were not allowed to stay there either. 

Lam 4:16 The face of Yahweh destroyed them, he will look on them no more. There was no respect for the 
priests, no deference for the elders. 

Lam 4:17 Continually we were wearing out our eyes, watching for help — in vain. From our towers we watched 
for a nation which could not save us anyway. 

Lam 4:18 Men dogged our steps, to keep us out of our streets. Our end was near, our days were done, our end 
had come. 

Lam 4:19 Our pursuers were swifter than eagles in the sky; they hounded our steps through the mountains, they 
lay in ambush for us in the wilds. 

Lam 4:20 The breath of our nostrils, Yahweh’s anointed, was caught in their traps, he of whom we said, “In his 
shadow we shall live among the nations”. 

Lam 4:21 Rejoice, exult, daughter of Edom, you who reside in Uz! To you in turn the cup will pass; you will get 
drunk and strip yourself naked! 

Lam 4:22 Your wickedness is atoned for, daughter of Zion, he will never banish you again. But your wickedness, 
daughter of Edom, will he punish, your sins he will lay bare! 



Lam 5:1 Yahweh, remember what has happened to us; consider, and see our degradation. 

Lam 5:2 Our heritage has passed to strangers, our homes to foreigners. 

Lam 5:3 We are orphans, we are fatherless; our mothers are like widows. 

Lam 5:4 We have to buy our own water to drink, our own wood we can get only at a price. 

Lam 5:5 The yoke is on our necks; we are persecuted; exhausted we are, allowed no rest. 

Lam 5:6 We made a pact with Egypt, with Assyria, to have plenty of food. 

Lam 5:7 Our ancestors sinned; they are no more, and we bear the weight of their guilt. 

Lam 5:8 Slaves rule us; there is no one to rescue us from their clutches. 

Lam 5:9 At peril of our lives we earn our bread, by risking the sword of the desert. 

Lam 5:10 Our skin is as hot as an oven, from the scorch of famine. 

Lam 5:11 The women in Zion have been raped, the young girls in the towns of Judah. 

Lam 5:12 Princes have been hanged by their hands; the face of the old has won no respect. 

Lam 5:13 Youths have been put to the mill, boys stagger under loads of wood. 

Lam 5:14 The elders have deserted the gateway; the young have given up their music. 

Lam 5:15 Joy has vanished from our hearts; our dancing has turned to mourning. 

Lam 5:16 The crown has fallen from our heads. Alas that ever we sinned! 

Lam 5:17 This is why our hearts are sick; this is why our eyes are dim: 

Lam 5:18 because Mount Zion is desolate; jackals roam to and fro on it. 

Lam 5:19 Yet you, Yahweh, rule from eternity; your throne endures from age to age. 

Lam 5:20 Why do you never remember us? Why do you abandon us so long? 

Lam 5:21 Make us come back to you, Yahweh, and we will come back. Restore us as we were before! 

Lam 5:22 Unless you have utterly rejected us, in an anger which knows no limit. 

Bar 1:1 This is the text of the book written in Babylon by Baruch son of Neraiah, son of Mahseiah, son of 
Zedekiah, son of Hasadiah, son of Hilkiah, 

Bar 1 :2 in the fifth year, on the seventh day of the month, at the time when the Chaldaeans had captured 
Jerusalem and burned it down. 

Bar 1 :3 Baruch read the text of this book aloud to Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and to all the 
people who had come to hear the reading, 

Bar 1 :4 to the nobles and the sons of the king, and to the elders; to the whole people, that is, to the least no less 
than to the greatest, to all who lived in Babylon beside the river Sud. 

Bar 1 :5 On hearing it they wept, fasted and prayed before the Lord; 

Bar 1 :6 and they collected as much money as each could afford 

Bar 1 :7 and sent it to Jerusalem to the priest Jehoiakim son of Hilkiah, son of Shallum, and the other priests, 
and all the people who were with him in Jerusalem. 

Bar 1 :8 Also on the tenth day of Sivan he was given the utensils of the house of the Lord, which had been 
removed from the Temple, to take them back to the land of Judah; these were silver utensils which Zedekiah son 
of Josiah, king of Judah, had had made 

Bar 1 :9 after Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had deported Jeconiah from Jerusalem to Babylon, together with 
the princes, the metalworkers, the nobles and the common people. 

Bar 1:10 Now, they wrote, we are sending you money to pay for burnt offerings, offerings for sin, and incense. 
Prepare oblations and offer them on the altar of the Lord our God; 

Bar 1:11 and pray for the long life of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and of his son Belshazzar, that they may 
endure on earth as long as the heavens endure; 

Bar 1:12 and that the Lord may give us strength and enlighten our eyes, so that we may lead our lives under the 
protection of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and of his son Belshazzar, and that we may serve them for a long 
time and win their favour. 

Bar 1:13 Also pray to the Lord our God for us, because we have sinned against him, and the anger, the fury of 
the Lord, has still not turned away from us. 

Bar 1:14 Lastly, you must read the booklet which we are sending you, publicly in the house of the Lord on the 
feastday and appropriate days. 

Bar 1:15 You must say: Saving justice is the Lord’s, we have only the look of shame we bear, as is the case 
today for the people of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 

Bar 1:16 for our kings and princes, our priests, our prophets, and for our ancestors, 

Bar 1:17 because we have sinned before the Lord, 

Bar 1:18 have disobeyed him, and have not listened to the voice of the Lord our God telling us to follow the 
commandments which the Lord had ordained for us. 

Bar 1:19 From the day when the Lord brought our ancestors out of Egypt until today we have been disobedient 
to the Lord our God, we have been disloyal, refusing to listen to his voice. 

Bar 1 :20 And we are not free even today of the disasters and the curse which the Lord pronounced through his 



servant Moses the day he brought our ancestors out of Egypt to give us a land flowing with milk and honey. 

Bar 1 :21 We have not listened to the voice of the Lord our God in all the words of those prophets he sent us; 

Bar 1:22 but, each following the dictates of our evil heart, we have taken to serving alien gods, and doing what 
is displeasing to the Lord our God. 

Bar 2:1 And so the Lord has carried out the sentence which he passed on us, on our judges who governed 
Israel, on our kings and leaders and on the people of Israel and of Judah; 

Bar 2:2 what he did to Jerusalem has never been paralleled under the wide heavens — in conformity with what 
was written in the Law of Moses; 

Bar 2:3 we were each reduced to eating the flesh of our own sons and daughters. 

Bar 2:4 Furthermore, he has handed them over into the power of all the kingdoms that surround us, to be the 
contempt and execration of all the neighbouring peoples among whom the Lord scattered them. 

Bar 2:5 Instead of being masters, they found themselves enslaved, because we had sinned against the Lord our 
God by not listening to his voice. 

Bar 2:6 Saving justice is the Lord's; we and our ancestors have only the look of shame we bear today. 

Bar 2:7 All those disasters which the Lord pronounced against us have now befallen us. 

Bar 2:8 And yet we have not tried to win the favour of the Lord by each of us renouncing the dictates of our own 
wicked heart; 

Bar 2:9 so the Lord has been alert to our misdeeds and has brought disaster down on us, since the Lord is 
upright in everything he had commanded us to do, 

Bar 2:10 and we have not listened to his voice so as to follow the commandments which the Lord had ordained 
for us. 

Bar 2:1 1 And now, Lord, God of Israel, who brought your people out of Egypt with a mighty hand, with signs and 
wonders, with great power and with outstretched arm, to win yourself a name such as you have today, 

Bar 2:12 we have sinned, we have committed sacrilege; Lord our God, we have broken all your precepts. 

Bar 2:13 Let your anger turn from us since we are no more than a little remnant among the nations where you 
have dispersed us. 

Bar 2:14 Listen, Lord, to our prayers and our entreaties; deliver us for your own sake and let us win the favour of 
the people who have deported us, 

Bar 2:15 so that the whole world may know that you are the Lord our God, since Israel and his descendants 
bear your name. 

Bar 2:16 Look down, Lord, from your holy dwelling-place and think of us, bow your ear and listen, 

Bar 2:17 open your eyes, Lord, and look; the dead down in Sheol, whose breath has been taken from their 
bodies, are not the ones to give glory and due recognition to the Lord; 

Bar 2:18 whoëver is overcome with affliction, who goes along bowed down and frail, with failing eyes and 
hungering soul, that is the one to give you glory and due recognition, Lord. 

Bar 2:19 We do not rely on the merits of our ancestors and of our kings to offer you our humble plea, Lord our 
God. 

Bar 2:20 No, you have sent down your anger and your fury on us, as you threatened through your servants the 
prophets when they said, 

Bar 2:21 The Lord says this: Bend your necks and serve the king of Babylon, and you will remain in the country 
which I gave to your ancestors. 

Bar 2:22 But if you do not listen to the voice of the Lord and serve the king of Babylon 

Bar 2:23 then I shall silence the shouts of rejoicing and mirth and the voices of bridegroom and bride in the 

towns of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem, and the whole country will be reduced to desert, with no 

inhabitants”. 

Bar 2:24 But we would not listen to your voice and serve the king of Babylon, and so you carried out what you 
had threatened through your servants the prophets: that the bones of our kings and of our ancestors would be 
dragged from their resting places. 

Bar 2:25 They were indeed tossed out to the heat of the day and the frost of the night. And people died in 
dreadful agony, from famine, sword and plague. 

Bar 2:26 And so, because of the wickedness of the House of Israel and the House of Judah, you have made 
this House, that bears your name, what it is today. 

Bar 2:27 And yet, Lord our God, you have treated us in a way worthy of all your goodness and boundless 
tenderness, 

Bar 2:28 just as you had promised through your servant Moses, the day you told him to write your Law in the 
presence of the Israelites, and said, 

Bar 2:29 “If you do not listen to my voice, this great and innumerable multitude will certainly be reduced to a tiny 
few among the nations where I shall scatter them- 

Bar 2:30 for I knew that, being an obstinate people, they would not listen to me. But in the country of their exile, 



they will come to themselves 

Bar 2:31 and acknowledge that I am the Lord their God. I shall give them a heart and an attentive ear, 

Bar 2:32 and they will sing my praises in the country of their exile, they will remember my name; 

Bar 2:33 they will stop being obstinate and, remembering what became of their ancestors who sinned before the 
Lord, will turn from their evil deeds. 

Bar 2:34 Then I shall bring them back to the country which I promised on oath to their ancestors Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, and make them masters in it. I shall make their numbers grow; they will not dwindle again. 

Bar 2:35 And I shall make an everlasting covenant with them; so that I am their God and they are my people. 
And never again shall I drive my people Israel out of the country which I have given them”. 

Bar 3:1 Almighty Lord, God of Israel, a soul in anguish, a troubled heart now cries to you: 

Bar 3:2 Listen and have pity, Lord, for we have sinned before you. 

Bar 3:3 You sit enthroned for ever, while we are perishing for ever. 

Bar 3:4 Almighty Lord, God of Israel, hear the prayer of the dead of Israel, of the children of those who have 
sinned against you and have not listened to the voice of the Lord their God; hence the disasters which dog us. 
Bar 3:5 Do not call to mind the misdeeds of our ancestors, but remember instead your power and your name. 
Bar 3:6 You are indeed the Lord our God and we will praise you, Lord, 

Bar 3:7 since you have put respect for you in our hearts to encourage us to call on your name. We long to 
praise you in our exile, for we have rid our hearts of the wickedness of our ancestors who sinned against you. 

Bar 3:8 Look, today we are still in exile where you have scattered us as something contemptible, accursed, 
condemned, for all the misdeeds of our ancestors who had abandoned the Lord our God. 

Bar 3:9 Listen, Israel, to commands that bring life; hear, and learn what knowledge means. 

Bar 3:10 Why, Israel, why are you in the country of your enemies, growing older and older in an alien land, 

Bar 3:1 1 defiling yourselves with the dead, reckoned with those who go to Sheol? 

Bar 3:12 It is because you have forsaken the fountain of wisdom! 

Bar 3:13 Had you walked in the way of God, you would be living in peace for ever. 

Bar 3:14 Learn where knowledge is, where strength, where understanding, and so learn where length of days is, 
where life, where the light of the eyes and where peace. 

Bar 3:15 But who has found out where she lives, who has entered her treasure house? 

Bar 3:16 Where now are the leaders of the nations and those who ruled even the beasts of earth, 

Bar 3:17 those who sported with the birds of heaven, those who accumulated silver and gold on which all 
people rely, and whose possessions had no end, 

Bar 3:18 those who worked so carefully in silver -but of whose works no trace is to be found? 

Bar 3:19 They have vanished, gone down to Sheol. Others have risen to their places, 

Bar 3:20 more recent generations have seen the day and peopled the earth in their turn, but the way of 

knowledge they have not found; 

Bar 3:21 they have not recognised the paths she treads. Nor have their children had any grasp of her, remaining 
far from her way. 

Bar 3:22 Nothing has been heard of her in Canaan, nothing has been seen of her in Teman; 

Bar 3:23 the children of Hagar in search of worldly wisdom, the merchants of Midian and Teman, the tale- 

spinners and the philosophers have none of them found the way to wisdom or remembered the paths she 
treads. 

Bar 3:24 How great, Israel, is the house of God, how wide his domain, 

Bar 3:25 immeasurably wide, infinitely lofty! 

Bar 3:26 In it were born the giants, famous from the beginning, immensely tall, expert in war; 

Bar 3:27 God’s choice did not fall on these, he did not show them the way of knowledge; 

Bar 3:28 they perished for lack of wisdom, perished by their own folly. 

Bar 3:29 Who has ever climbed the sky and seized her to bring her down from the clouds? 

Bar 3:30 Who has ever crossed the ocean and found her to bring her back in exchange for the finest gold? 

Bar 3:31 No one can learn the way to her, no one can understand the path she treads. 

Bar 3:32 But the One who knows all discovers her, he has grasped her with his own intellect, he has set the 

earth firm for evermore and filled it with four-footed beasts, 

Bar 3:33 he sends the light — and it goes, he recalls it — and trembling it obeys; 

Bar 3:34 the stars shine joyfully at their posts; 

Bar 3:35 when he calls them, they answer, “Here we are”; they shine to delight their Creator. 

Bar 3:36 It is he who is our God, no other can compare with him. 

Bar 3:37 He has uncovered the whole way of knowledge and shown it to his servant Jacob, to Israel his well- 
beloved; 

Bar 3:38 only then did she appear on earth and live among human beings. 

Bar 4:1 She is the book of God’s commandments, the Law that stands for ever; those who keep her shall live, 



those who desert her shall die. 

Bar 4:2 Turn back, Jacob, seize her, in her radiance make your way to light: 

Bar 4:3 do not yield your glory to another, your privilege to a people not your own. 

Bar 4:4 Israel, blessed are we: what pleases God has been revealed to us! 

Bar 4:5 Take courage, my people, memorial of Israel! 

Bar 4:6 You were sold to the nations, but not for extermination. You provoked God; and so were delivered to 
your enemies, 

Bar 4:7 since you had angered your Creator by offering sacrifices to demons, and not to God. 

Bar 4:8 You had forgotten the eternal God who reared you. You had also grieved Jerusalem who nursed you, 
Bar 4:9 for when she saw God’s anger falling on you, she said: Listen, you neighbours of Zion: God has sent me 
great sorrow. 

Bar 4:10 I have seen my sons and daughters taken into captivity, which the Eternal brought down on them. 

Bar 4:1 1 I had reared them joyfully; in tears, in sorrow, I watched them go away. 

Bar 4:12 Do not, any of you, exult over me, a widow, deserted by so many; I am bereaved because of the sins 
of my children, who turned away from the Law of God, 

Bar 4:13 who did not want to know his precepts and would not follow the ways of his commandments or tread 
the paths of discipline as his justice directed. 

Bar 4:14 Come here, neighbours of Zion! Remember my sons’ and daughters’ captivity, which the Eternal 
brought down on them. 

Bar 4: 15 How he brought a distant nation down on them, a ruthless nation speaking a foreign language, they 
showed neither respect for the aged, nor pity for the child; 

Bar 4:16 they carried off the widow’s cherished sons, they left her quite alone, bereft of her daughters. 

Bar 4:17 For my part, how could I help you? 

Bar 4:18 He who brought those disasters down on you, is the one to deliver you from your enemies’ clutches. 
Bar 4:19 Go, my children, go your way! I must stay bereft and lonely; 

Bar 4:20 I have taken off the clothes of peace and put on the sackcloth of entreaty; all my life I shall cry to the 
Eternal. 

Bar 4:21 Take courage, my children, call on God: he will deliver you from tyranny, from the clutches of your 
enemies; 

Bar 4:22 for I look to the Eternal for your rescue, and joy has come to me from the Holy One at the mercy soon 
to reach you from your Saviour, the Eternal. 

Bar 4:23 In sorrow and tears I watched you go away, but God will give you back to me in joy and gladness for 
ever. 

Bar 4:24 As the neighbours of Zion have now witnessed your captivity, so will they soon see your rescue by 
God, which will come upon you with great glory and splendour of the Eternal. 

Bar 4:25 My children, patiently bear the anger brought on you by God. Your enemy has persecuted you, but 
soon you will witness his destruction and set your foot on his neck. 

Bar 4:26 My favourite children have travelled by rough roads, carried off like a flock by a marauding enemy. 

Bar 4:27 Take courage, my children, call on God: he who brought this on you will remember you. 

Bar 4:28 As by your will you first strayed from God, so now turn back and search for him ten times harder; 

Bar 4:29 for as he has been bringing down those disasters on you, so will he rescue you and give you eternal 
joy. 

Bar 4:30 Take courage, Jerusalem: he who gave you your name will console you. 

Bar 4:31 Disaster will come to all who have ill-treated you and gloated over your fall. 

Bar 4:32 Disaster will come to the cities where your children were slaves; disaster to whichever one received 
your children, 

Bar 4:33 for just as she rejoiced at your fall and was happy to see you ruined, so will she grieve over her own 
desolation. 

Bar 4:34 I shall deprive her of the joy of a populous city, and her insolence will turn to mourning; 

Bar 4:35 fire from the Eternal will befall her for many a day, and demons will dwell in her for ages. 

Bar 4:36 Jerusalem, turn your eyes to the east, see the joy that is coming to you from God. 

Bar 4:37 Look, the children you watched go away are on their way home; reassembled from east and west, they 
are on their way home at the Holy One’s command, rejoicing in God’s glory. 

Bar 5:1 Jerusalem, take off your dress of sorrow and distress, put on the beauty of God’s glory for evermore, 

Bar 5:2 wrap the cloak of God’s saving justice around you, put the diadem of the Eternal One’s glory on your 
head, 

Bar 5:3 for God means to show your splendour to every nation under heaven, 

Bar 5:4 and the name God gives you for evermore will be, “Peace-through-Justice, and Glory-through-Devotion'. 
Bar 5:5 Arise, Jerusalem, stand on the heights and turn your eyes to the east: see your children reassembled 



from west and east at the Holy One’s command, rejoicing because God has remembered. 

Bar 5:6 Though they left you on foot driven by enemies, now God brings them back to you, carried gloriously, 
like a royal throne. 

Bar 5:7 For God has decreed the flattening of each high mountain, of the everlasting hills, the filling of the 
valleys to make the ground level so that Israel can walk safely in God’s glory. 

Bar 5:8 And the forests and every fragrant tree will provide shade for Israel, at God’s command; 

Bar 5:9 for God will guide Israel in joy by the light of his glory, with the mercy and saving justice which come 
from him. A copy of the letter which Jeremiah sent to those about to be led captive to Babylon by the king of the 
Babylonians, to tell them what he had been commanded by God: 

Bar 6:1 “Because of the sins which you have committed before God you are to be deported to Babylon by 
Nebuchadnezzar king of the Babylonians. 

Bar 6:2 Once you have reached Babylon you will stay there for many years, as long as seven generations; after 
which I shall bring you home in peace. 

Bar 6:3 Now in Babylon you will see gods made of silver, of gold, of wood, being carried shoulder-high, and 
filling the gentiles with fear. 

Bar 6:4 Be on your guard! Do not imitate the foreigners, do not have any fear of their gods 

Bar 6:5 as you see their worshippers prostrating themselves before and behind them. Instead, say in your 

hearts, ‘Master, it is you that we must worship’. 

Bar 6:6 For my angel is with you; your lives will be in his care. 

Bar 6:7 “Overlaid with gold and silver, their tongues polished smooth by a craftsman, they are counterfeit and 
have no power to speak. 

Bar 6:8 As though for a girl fond of finery, these people take gold and make crowns for the heads of their gods. 
Bar 6:9 And sometimes, the priests filch gold and silver from their gods to spend on themselves, even giving 
some of it to the prostitutes on the terrace. 

Bar 6:10 They dress up these gods of silver, gold and wood, in clothes, like human beings; on their own they 
cannot protect themselves from either tarnish or woodworm; 

Bar 6:11 when they have been dressed in purple cloaks, their faces have to be dusted, because of the temple 
dust which settles thick on them. 

Bar 6:12 One holds a sceptre like the governor of a province, yet is powerless to put to death anyone who 
offends him; 

Bar 6:13 another holds sword and mace in his right hand, yet is powerless to defend himself against war or 
thieves. 

Bar 6:14 From this it is evident that they are not gods; do not be afraid of them. 

Bar 6:15 “Just as a pot in common use becomes useless once it is broken, so are these gods enshrined inside 
their temples. 

Bar 6:16 Their eyes are full of dust raised by the feet of those who enter. 

Bar 6:17 Just as the doors are locked on all sides on someöne who has offended a king and is under sentence 
of death, so the priests secure the temples of these gods with gates and bolts and bars for fear of burglary. 

Bar 6:18 They light more lamps for them than they do for themselves, and the gods see none of them. 

Bar 6:19 They are like one of the temple beams, which are said to be gnawed away from within; the termites 
creep out of the ground and eat them and their clothes too, and they feel nothing. 

Bar 6:20 Their faces are blackened by the smoke that rises from the temple. 

Bar 6:21 Bats, swallows, birds of every kind perch on their bodies and heads, and so do cats. 

Bar 6:22 From this, you can see for yourselves that they are not gods; do not be afraid of them. 

Bar 6:23 “The gold with which they are parading their futility before the world is supposed to make them look 
beautiful, but if someöne does not rub off the tarnish, these gods will not be shining much on their own, and even 
while they were being cast, they felt nothing. 

Bar 6:24 However much was paid for them, there is still no breath of life in them. 

Bar 6:25 Being unable to walk, they have to be carried on men’s shoulders, which shows how futile they are. It 
is humiliating for their worshippers, too, who have to stand them up again if they fall over. 

Bar 6:26 Once they have been stood up, they cannot move on their own; if they tilt askew, they cannot right 
themselves; offerings made to them might as well be made to the dead. 

Bar 6:27 Whatever is sacrificed to them, the priests re-sell and pocket the profit; while their wives salt down part 
of it, but give nothing to the poor or to the helpless. As to the sacrifices themselves, why, women during their 
periods and women in childbed are not afraid to touch them! 

Bar 6:28 From all this you can tell that they are not gods; do not be afraid of them. 

Bar 6:29 “Indeed, how can they even be called gods, when women do the offering to these gods of silver, gold 
and wood? 

Bar 6:30 In their temples, the priests stay sitting down, their garments torn, heads and beard shaved and heads 



uncovered; 

Bar 6:31 they roar and shriek before their gods as people do at funeral feasts. 

Bar 6:32 The priests take robes from the gods to clothe their own wives and children. 

Bar 6:33 Whether these gods are treated badly or well, they are incapable of paying back either treatment; as 
incapable too of making or unmaking kings, 

Bar 6:34 equally incapable of distributing wealth or money. If anyone fails to honour a vow he has made to 
them, they cannot call him to account. 

Bar 6:35 They can neither save anyone from death nor rescue the weak from the strong, 

Bar 6:36 nor restore sight to the blind, nor save anyone in trouble, 

Bar 6:37 nor take pity on a widow, nor be generous to an orphan. 

Bar 6:38 These wooden gods overlaid with gold and silver are about as much use as rocks cut out of the 
mountain side. Their worshippers will be confounded! 

Bar 6:39 So how can anyone think or say that they are gods? 

Bar 6:40 The Chaldaeans themselves do them no honour; if they find someöne who is dumb and cannot speak, 
they present him to Bel, entreating him for the gift of speech, as though he could perceive it! 

Bar 6:41 And they are incapable of drawing the conclusion and abandoning those gods — such is their lack of 
perception. 

Bar 6:42 Women with strings round their waists sit in the streets, burning bran like incense; 

Bar 6:43 when one of these has been picked up by a passer-by and been to bed with him, she then gloats over 
her neighbour for not having been thought as worthy as herself and for not having had her string broken. 

Bar 6:44 Whatever is done for them is spurious. So how can anyone think or say that they are gods? 

Bar 6:45 “Made by woodworkers and goldsmiths, they are only what those workmen decide to make them. 

Bar 6:46 Their makers have not long to live themselves, so how can the things they make be gods? 

Bar 6:47 Their legacy to their descendants is nothing but delusion and dishonour. 

Bar 6:48 If war or disasters befall them, the priests discuss where best to hide themselves and these gods; 

Bar 6:49 how can anyone fail to realise that they are not gods, if they cannot save themselves from war or from 
disasters? 

Bar 6:50 And since they are only made of wood overlaid with gold or silver, it will later become apparent that 
they are spurious; it will be obvious to everyone, to nations as to kings, that they are not gods but the work of 
human hands, and that there is no divine activity in them. 

Bar 6:51 Does anyone still need convincing that they are not gods? 

Bar 6:52 They can neither appoint a king over a country, nor give rain to humankind, 

Bar 6:53 nor regulate their own affairs, nor rescue anyone who suffers a wrong; they are as helpless as crows 
between sky and ground. 

Bar 6:54 If fire falls on the temple of these wooden gods overlaid with gold or silver, their priests fly to safety 
while they for their part stay there like beams, to be burnt. 

Bar 6:55 They cannot put up any resistance to a king or to enemies. 

Bar 6:56 So how can anyone think or say that they are gods? 

Bar 6:57 These wooden gods overlaid with gold or silver cannot evade thieves or marauders; strong men may 
rob them of their gold and silver and make off with the robes they are dressed in; yet they are powerless to help 
even themselves. 

Bar 6:58 Better to be a king displaying his prowess, a household pot of use to its owner, than to be these 
counterfeit gods; or merely the door of a house, protecting what is inside, than these counterfeit gods; or a 
wooden pillar in a palace than these counterfeit gods. 

Bar 6:59 The sun, the moon and the stars, which shine and have been given work to do, are obedient; 

Bar 6:60 similarly, the lightning, as it flashes, is a fine sight; in the same way, the wind blows across every 
country, 

Bar 6:61 the clouds execute the order God gives them to pass over the whole earth, and the fire, sent from 
above to consume mountain and forest, carries out its orders. 

Bar 6:62 Now these gods are not their equals, either in beauty or in power. 

Bar 6:63 So, no one can think or say that they are gods, powerless as they are to administer justice or to do 
anyone any good. 

Bar 6:64 Therefore, knowing that they are not gods, do not be afraid of them. 

Bar 6:65 “For they can neither curse nor bless kings, 

Bar 6:66 nor produce signs in heaven for the nations, nor shine like the sun, nor shed light like the moon. 

Bar 6:67 The animals are better off than they are, being able to look after themselves by making for cover. 

Bar 6:68 There is not the slightest shred of evidence that they are gods; so do not be afraid of them! 

Bar 6:69 “Their wooden gods overlaid with gold and silver are like a scarecrow in a field of cucumbers — 
protecting nothing. 



Bar 6:70 Or again, their wooden gods overlaid with gold and silver are like a thorn-bush in a garden — any kind 
of bird may perch on it — or like a corpse thrown out into the dark. 

Bar 6:71 From the purple and linen rotting on their backs you can tell that they are not gods; and in the end, 
eaten away, they will be the dishonour of the country. 

Bar 6:72 Better, then, someöne upright who has no idols; dishonour will never come near him”. 

Eze 1:1 In the thirtieth year, on the fifth day of the fourth month, as I was among the exiles by the River Chebar, 
heaven opened and I saw visions from God. 

Eze 1 :2 On the fifth of the month — it was the fifth year of exile for King Jehoiachin- 

Eze 1 :3 the word of Yahweh was addressed to the priest Ezekiel son of Buzi, in Chaldaea by the River Chebar. 
There the hand of Yahweh came on him. 

Eze 1 :4 I looked; a stormy wind blew from the north, a great cloud with flashing fire and brilliant light round it, 
and in the middle, in the heart of the fire, a brilliance like that of amber, 

Eze 1 :5 and in the middle what seemed to be four living creatures. They looked like this: They were of human 
form. 

Eze 1 :6 Each had four faces, each had four wings. 

Eze 1 :7 Their legs were straight; they had hooves like calves, glittering like polished brass. 

Eze 1 :8 Below their wings, they had human hands on all four sides corresponding to their four faces and four 
wings. 

Eze 1 :9 They touched one another with their wings; they did not turn as they moved; each one moved straight 
forward. 

Eze 1:10 As to the appearance of their faces, all four had a human face, and a lion’s face to the right, and all 
four had a bull’s face to the left, and all four had an eagle’s face. 

Eze 1:11 Their wings were spread upwards, each had one pair touching its neighbour’s, and the other pair 
covering its body. 

Eze 1:12 And each one moved straight forward; they went where the spirit urged them, they did not turn as they 
moved. 

Eze 1:13 Between these living creatures were what looked like blazing coals, like torches, darting backwards 
and forwards between the living creatures; the fire gave a brilliant light, and lightning flashed from the fire, 

Eze 1:14 and the living creatures kept disappearing and reappearing like flashes of lightning. 

Eze 1:15 Now, as I looked at the living creatures, I saw a wheel touching the ground beside each of the four- 
faced living creatures. 

Eze 1:16 The appearance and structure of the wheels were like glittering chrysolite. All four looked alike, and 
their appearance and structure were such that each wheel seemed to have another wheel inside it. 

Eze 1:17 In whichever of the four directions they moved, they did not need to turn as they moved. 

Eze 1:18 Their circumference was of awe-inspiring size, and the rims of all four sparkled all the way round. 

Eze 1:19 When the living creatures moved, the wheels moved beside them; and when the living creatures left 
the ground, the wheels too left the ground. 

Eze 1 :20 They moved in whichever direction the spirit chose to go, and the wheels rose with them, since the 
wheels shared the spirit of the animals. 

Eze 1 :21 When the living creatures moved on, they moved on; when the former halted, the latter halted; when 
the former left the ground, the wheels too left the ground, since the wheels shared the spirit of the animals. 

Eze 1 :22 Over the heads of the living creatures was what looked like a solid surface glittering like crystal, 
spread out over their heads, above them, 

Eze 1 :23 and under the solid surface, their wings were spread out straight, touching one another, and each had 
a pair covering its body. 

Eze 1 :24 I also heard the noise of their wings; when they moved, it was like the noise of flood-waters, like the 
voice of Shaddai, like the noise of a storm, like the noise of an armed camp; and when they halted, they lowered 
their wings; 

Eze 1 :25 there was a noise too. 

Eze 1 :26 Beyond the solid surface above their heads, there was what seemed like a sapphire, in the form of a 
throne. High above on the form of a throne was a form with the appearance of a human being. 

Eze 1 .21 I saw a brilliance like amber, like fire, radiating from what appeared to be the waist upwards; and from 
what appeared to be the waist downwards, I saw what looked like fire, giving a brilliant light all round. 

Eze 1 :28 The radiance of the encircling light was like the radiance of the bow in the clouds on rainy days. The 
sight was like the glory of Yahweh. I looked and fell to the ground, and I heard the voice of someöne speaking to 
me. 

Eze 2:1 He said, “Son of man, get to your feet; I will speak to you”. 

Eze 2:2 As he said these words the spirit came into me and put me on my feet, and I heard him speaking to me. 
Eze 2:3 He said, “Son of man, I am sending you to the Israelites, to the rebels who have rebelled against me. 



They and their ancestors have been in revolt against me up to the present day. 

Eze 2:4 Because they are stubborn and obstinate children, I am sending you to them, to say, ‘Lord Yahweh 
says this’. 

Eze 2:5 Whether they listen or not, this tribe of rebels will know there is a prophet among them. 

Eze 2:6 And you, son of man, do not be afraid of them or of what they say, though you find yourself surrounded 
with brambles and sitting on scorpions. Do not be afraid of their words or alarmed by their looks, for they are a 
tribe of rebels. 

Eze 2:7 You are to deliver my words to them whether they listen or not, for they are a tribe of rebels. 

Eze 2:8 But you, son of man, are to listen to what I say to you; do not be a rebel like that rebellious tribe. Open 
your mouth and eat what I am about to give you”. 

Eze 2:9 When I looked, there was a hand stretch- ing out to me, holding a scroll. 

Eze 2:10 He un- rolled it in front of me; it was written on, front and back; on it was written “Lamentations, dirges 
and cries of grief “. 

Eze 3:1 He then said, “Son of man, eat what you see; eat this scroll, then go and speak to the House of Israel”. 
Eze 3:2 I opened my mouth; he gave me the scroll to eat 

Eze 3:3 and then said, “Son of man, feed on this scroll which I am giving you and eat your fill”. So I ate it, and it 
tasted sweet as honey. 

Eze 3:4 He then said, “Son of man, go to the House of Israel and tell them what I have said. 

Eze 3:5 You are not being sent to a nation that speaks a difficult foreign language; you are being sent to the 
House of Israel. 

Eze 3:6 Not to big nations that speak difficult foreign languages, and whose words you would not understand — 
if I sent you to them, they would listen to you; 

Eze 3:7 but the House of Israel will not listen to you because it will not listen to me. The whole House of Israel is 
defiant and obstinate. 

Eze 3:8 But now, I am making you as defiant as they are, and as obstinate as they are; 

Eze 3:9 I am making your resolution as hard as a diamond, harder than flint. So do not be afraid of them, do not 
be overawed by them, for they are a tribe of rebels”. 

Eze 3:10 Then he said, “Son of man, take to heart everything I say to you, listen carefully, 

Eze 3:1 1 then go to your exiled countrymen and talk to them. Say to them, ‘Lord Yahweh says this’, whether 
they listen or not”. 

Eze 3:12 The spirit lifted me up, and behind me I heard a great vibrating sound, “Blessed be the glory of 
Yahweh in his dwelling-place!”. 

Eze 3:13 This was the sound of the living creatures’ wings beating against each other, and the sound of the 
wheels beside them: a great vibrating sound. 

Eze 3:14 The spirit lifted me up and took me, and I went, bitter and angry, and the hand of Yahweh lay heavy on 
me. 

Eze 3:15 I came to Tel Abib, to the exiles beside the River Chebar where they were living, and there I stayed 
with them in a stupor for seven days. 

Eze 3:16 After seven days the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 3:17 “Son of man, I have appointed you as watchman for the House of Israel. When you hear a word from 
my mouth, warn them from me. 

Eze 3:18 If I say to someöne wicked, ‘You will die’, and you do not warn this person; if you do not speak to 
warn someöne wicked to renounce evil and so save his life, it is the wicked person who will die for the guilt, but I 
shall hold you responsible for that death. 

Eze 3:19 If, however, you do warn someöne wicked who then fails to renounce wickedness and evil ways, the 
wicked person will die for the guilt, but you yourself will have saved your life. 

Eze 3:20 When someöne upright renounces uprightness to do evil and I set a trap for him, it is he who will die; 
since you failed to warn him, he will die for his guilt, and the uprightness he practised will no longer be 
remembered; but I shall hold you responsible for his death. 

Eze 3:21 If, however, you warn someöne upright not to sin and this person does not sin, such a one will live, 
thanks to your warning, and you too will have saved your life”. 

Eze 3:22 While I was there the hand of Yahweh came on me; he said, “Get up, go out into the valley, and there I 
shall speak to you”. 

Eze 3:23 I got up and went out into the valley; the glory of Yahweh was resting there, like the glory I had seen 
by the River Chebar, and I fell to the ground. 

Eze 3:24 The spirit of Yahweh then entered me and put me on my feet and spoke to me. He said, “Go and shut 
yourself in your house. 

Eze 3:25 Son of man, you are about to be tied and bound, and unable to mix with other people. 

Eze 3:26 I am going to make your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth; you will be dumb, and no longer able 



to reprove them, for they are a tribe of rebels. 

Eze 3:27 When I speak to you, however, I shall open your mouth and then you will say to them, ‘Lord Yahweh 
says this: Let anyone prepared to listen, listen; let anyone who refuses, refuse!’ — for they are a tribe of rebels”. 

Eze 4:1 “For your part, son of man, take a brick and lay it in front of you; on it scratch a city, Jerusalem. 

Eze 4:2 You are then to besiege it, trench round it, build earthworks, pitch camps and bring up battering-rams all 
round. 

Eze 4:3 Then take an iron pan and place it as though it were an iron wall between you and the city. Then fix 
your gaze on it; it is being besieged and you are besieging it. This is a sign for the House of Israel. 

Eze 4:4 “Lie down on your left side and take the guilt of the House of Israel on yourself. You will bear their guilt 
for as many days as you lie on that side. 

Eze 4:5 Allowing one day for every year of their guilt, I ordain that you bear it for three hundred and ninety days; 
this is how you will bear the House of Israel’s guilt. 

Eze 4:6 And when you have finished doing this, you are to lie down again, on your right side, and bear the guilt 
of the House of Judah for forty days. I have set the length for you as one day for one year. 

Eze 4:7 Then fix your gaze on the siege of Jerusalem, raise your bared arm and prophesy against her. 

Eze 4:8 Look, I am going to tie you up and you will not be able to turn over from one side to the other until the 
period of your seclusion is over. 

Eze 4:9 “Now take wheat, barley, beans, lentils, millet and spelt; put them all in the same pot and make them 
into bread for yourself. You are to eat it for as many days as you are lying on your side — three hundred and 
ninety days. 

Eze 4:10 Of this food, you are to weigh out a daily portion of twenty shekels and eat it a little piece at a time. 

Eze 4:11 And you are to ration the water you drink — a sixth of a <i>hin</i> — drinking that a little at a time. 

Eze 4:12 You are to eat this in the form of a barley cake baked where they can see you, on human dung”. 

Eze 4:13 And Yahweh said, “This is how the Israelites will have to eat their defiled food, wherever I disperse 
them among the nations”. 

Eze 4:14 I then said, “Lord Yahweh, my soul is not defiled. From my childhood until now, I have never eaten an 
animal that has died a natural death or been savaged; no tainted meat has ever entered my mouth”. 

Eze 4:15 “Very well”, he said, “I grant you cow-dung instead of human dung; you are to bake your bread on that”. 
Eze 4:16 He then said, “Son of man, I am going to cut off Jerusalem’s food supply; in their extremity, the food 
they eat will be weighed out; to their horror, the water they drink will be rationed, 

Eze 4:17 until there is no food or water left, and they fall into a stupor and waste away because of their guilt”. 

Eze 5:1 “Son of man, take a sharp sword, use it like a barber’s razor and run it over your head and beard. Then 
take scales and divide the hair you have cut off. 

Eze 5:2 Burn one-third inside the city, while the days of the siege are working themselves out. Then take 
another third and chop it up with the sword all round the city. The last third you are to scatter to the wind, while I 
unsheathe the sword behind them. 

Eze 5:3 Also take a few hairs and tie them up in the folds of your cloak; 

Eze 5:4 and of these again take a few, and throw them on the fire and burn them. From them fire will come on 
the whole House of Israel. 

Eze 5:5 “The Lord Yahweh says this, ‘This is Jerusalem, which I have placed in the middle of the nations, 
surrounded with foreign countries. 

Eze 5:6 She has rebelled more perversely against my observances than the nations have, and against my laws 
than the surrounding countries have; for they have rejected my observances and not kept my laws’. 

Eze 5:7 “Therefore, the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Because your disorders are worse than those of the nations 
round you, since you do not keep my laws or respect my observances, and since you do not respect even the 
observances of the surrounding nations, 

Eze 5:8 very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: I, too, am against you and shall execute my judgements on you 
for the nations to see. 

Eze 5:9 Because of all your loathsome practices I shall do such things as I have never done before, nor shall 
ever do again. 

Eze 5:10 Those of you who are parents will eat their children, and children will eat their parents. I shall execute 
judgement on you and disperse what remains of you to the winds. 

Eze 5:1 1 For, as I live — declares Lord Yahweh — as sure as you have defiled my sanctuary with all your horrors 
and all your loathsome practices, so I too shall reject you without a glance of pity, I shall not spare you. 

Eze 5:12 A third of your citizens will die of plague or starve to death inside you; a third will fall by the sword 
round you; and a third I shall scatter to the winds, unsheathing the sword behind them. 

Eze 5:13 I shall sate my anger and bring my fury to rest on them until I am avenged; and when I have sated my 
fury on them, then they will know that I, Yahweh, spoke out of jealousy for you. 

Eze 5:14 Yes, I shall reduce you to a ruin, an object of derision to the surrounding nations, in the eyes of all who 



pass by. 

Eze 5:15 You will be an object of derision and insults, an example, an object of amazement to the surrounding 
nations, when I execute judgement on you in furious anger and furious punishments. I, Yahweh, have spoken. 
Eze 5:16 On them I shall send the deadly arrows of famine, which will destroy you — for I shall send them to 
destroy you; then I shall make the famine worse and cut off your food supply. 

Eze 5:17 I shall send famine and wild animals on you to rob you of your children; plague and bloodshed will 
sweep through you, and I shall bring the sword down on you. I, Yahweh, have spoken’”. 

Eze 6:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 6:2 “Son of man, turn towards the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them. 

Eze 6:3 Say, ‘Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord Yahweh. The Lord Yahweh says this to mountains 
and hills and ravines and valleys: Look, I am going to summon the sword against you and destroy your high 
places. 

Eze 6:4 Your altars will be wrecked, and your incense burners smashed; I shall fling your butchered inhabitants 
down in front of your foul idols; 

Eze 6:5 I shall lay the corpses of the Israelites in front of their foul idols and scatter their bones all round your 
altars. 

Eze 6:6 Wherever you live, the towns will be destroyed and the high places wrecked, to the ruin and wrecking of 
your altars, the shattering and abolition of your foul idols, the smashing of your incense burners and the utter 
destruction of all your works. 

Eze 6:7 As the butchered fall about you, you will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 6:8 ‘But I shall spare some of you to escape the sword among the nations, when you have been dispersed 
in their lands; 

Eze 6:9 and your survivors will remember me among the nations where they are held captive, since I shall have 
broken their adulterous hearts for having deserted me, and destroyed their eyes for having turned adulterously 
towards their foul idols. They will loathe themselves for all the wrong they have caused by their loathsome 
practices. 

Eze 6:10 Then they will know that I am Yahweh and that I was not talking lightly when I said that I would inflict 
these disasters on them’. 

Eze 6:1 1 “The Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Clap your hands, stamp your feet, and say: Alas for all the loathsome 
sins of the House of Israel, which is about to fall by sword, famine and plague! 

Eze 6:12 Far off, they will die by plague; near at hand they will fall by the sword; and any who survive or are 
spared will die of famine. This is how I shall sate my fury on them. 

Eze 6:13 Then you will know that I am Yahweh, when their butchered corpses lie among their foul idols, all 
round their altars, on every high hill, on every mountain top, under every green tree, under every leafy oak, 
wherever they offer a smell pleasing to all their idols. 

Eze 6:14 I shall point my finger at them and reduce the country to an empty wasteland from the desert to Riblah, 
everywhere they live, and they will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 7:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 7:2 “Son of man, say, ‘Lord Yahweh says this to the land of Israel: Finished! The end is coming for the four 
corners of the country. 

Eze 7:3 This is the end for you; I shall unleash my anger on you, and judge you as your conduct deserves and 
call you to account for all your loathsome practices. 

Eze 7:4 I shall show you no pity, I shall not spare you; I shall repay you for your conduct and for the loathsome 
practices in which you persist. Then you will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 7:5 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Disaster, a unique disaster, is coming. 

Eze 7:6 The end is coming, the end is coming, it is on the move towards you, it is coming now. 

Eze 7:7 Now it is your turn, you who dwell in this country. Doom is coming, the day is near; no joy now, only 
tumult, on the mountains. 

Eze 7:8 Now I shall soon vent my fury on you and sate my anger on you: I shall judge you as your conduct 
deserves and repay you for all your loathsome practices. 

Eze 7:9 I shall show neither pity nor mercy, but shall repay you for your conduct and the loathsome practices in 
which you persist. Then you will know that I am Yahweh and that I strike. 

Eze 7:10 ‘Now is the day, your turn has come, it has come, it appears, the sceptre has blossomed, pride is at its 
peak. 

Eze 7:11 Violence has risen to become the scourge of wickedness … 

Eze 7:12 Doom is coming, the day is near. Neither should buyer rejoice, nor seller regret, for the fury rests on 
everyone alike. 

Eze 7:13 The seller will not be able to go back on his bargain; each persists in his sins; they take no defensive 
measures. 



Eze 7:14 The trumpet sounds, all is ready, but no one goes into battle, since my fury rests on all alike. 

Eze 7:15 ‘Outside, the sword; inside, plague and famine. Whoëver is living in the countryside will die by the 
sword; whoëver is living in the city will be devoured by famine and plague. 

Eze 7:16 And those who escape will escape to the mountains and there, like doves of the valleys, I shall 
slaughter them all, each one for his sin. 

Eze 7:17 Every hand will grow limp, every knee turn to water. 

Eze 7:18 They will put on sackcloth, each one trembling. Every face will be ashamed and every head be 
shaved. 

Eze 7:19 They will throw their silver away in the streets and their gold they will regard as a pollution; neither 
their silver nor their gold will be able to save them on the day of Yahweh’s fury. Never again will they have 
enough to eat, never again will they fill their bellies, since that was the occasion for their guilt. 

Eze 7:20 They used to pride themselves on the beauty of their jewellery, out of which they made their 
loathsome images, their horrors; so now I have made it pollute them. 

Eze 7:21 I shall hand it over as plunder to foreigners, as loot to the most evil people on earth. They will profane 
it. 

Eze 7:22 I shall turn my face away from them, while my treasure-house is profaned and robbers will force their 
way in and profane it. 

Eze 7:23 ‘Forge yourself a chain; for the country is full of bloody executions and the city full of deeds of 
violence, 

Eze 7:24 so I shall bring the cruellest of the nations to seize their houses. I shall put an end to the pride of their 
elite, and their sanctuary will be profaned. 

Eze 7:25 Terror is on the way: they will look for peace and there will be none. 

Eze 7:26 Disaster will follow on disaster, rumour on rumour; they will pester the prophet for a vision; the priest 
will be at a loss over the law and the elders on how to advise. 

Eze 7:27 The king will go into mourning, the prince be plunged in grief, the hands of the country people tremble. 

I shall treat them as their conduct deserves, and judge them as their own verdicts merit. Then they will know that 
I am Yahweh!’. 1 

Eze 8:1 In the sixth year, on the fifth day of the sixth month, I was sitting at home and the elders of Judah were 
sitting with me, when suddenly the hand of the Lord Yahweh fell on me there. 

Eze 8:2 I looked, and there was a form with the appearance of a human being. Downwards from what seemed 
to be the waist there was fire; and upwards from the waist there was a brilliance like the glitter of amber. 

Eze 8:3 Something like a hand was stretched out and it took me by a lock of my hair; and the spirit lifted me 
between heaven and earth and, in visions from God, took me to Jerusalem, to the entrance of the inner north 
gate, where stands the idol that provokes jealousy. 

Eze 8:4 There was the glory of the God of Israel; it looked like what I had seen in the valley. 

Eze 8:5 He said, “Son of man, raise your eyes to the north”. I raised my eyes to the north, and there, to the north 

of the altar gate, stood this statue of jealousy at the entrance. 

Eze 8:6 He said, “Son of man, do you see what they are doing, the monstrous, loathsome things that the House 
of Israel is practising here, to drive me out of my sanctuary? And you will see practices more loathsome still”. 

Eze 8:7 He next took me to the entrance to the court. I looked; there was a hole in the wall. 

Eze 8:8 He said, “Son of man, bore through the wall”. I bored through the wall, until I had made an opening. 

Eze 8:9 He said, “Go in and look at the loathsome things they are doing inside”. 

Eze 8:10 I went in and looked and there was every kind of reptile and repulsive animal, and all the foul idols of 
the House of Israel, carved all round the walls. 

Eze 8:11 Seventy elders of the House of Israel were worshipping the idols — among them Jaazaniah son of 
Shaphan — each one with his censer in his hand, from which rose a fragrant cloud of incense. 

Eze 8:12 He said, “Son of man, have you seen what the elders of the House of Israel do in the dark, each in his 
personal image-shrine? They say, ‘Yahweh cannot see us; Yahweh has abandoned the country’”. 

Eze 8:13 He said, “You will see them at practices more loathsome still”. 

Eze 8:14 He next took me to the entrance of the north gate of the Temple of Yahweh where women were sitting, 
weeping for Tammuz. 

Eze 8:15 He said, “Son of man, do you see that? You will see even more loathsome things than that”. 

Eze 8:16 He then led me to the inner court of the Temple of Yahweh. And there, at the entrance to Yahweh’s 
sanctuary, between the portico and the altar, there were about twenty-five men, with their backs to Yahweh’s 
sanctuary and their faces turned towards the east. They were prostrating themselves to the east, before the 
rising sun. 

Eze 8:17 He said to me, “Son of man, do you see that? Is it not bad enough for the House of Judah to be doing 
the loathsome things they are doing here? But they fill the country with violence and provoke my anger further; 
look at them now putting that branch to their nostrils. 



Eze 8:18 And so I shall react in fury; I shall show neither pity nor mercy. They may cry as loudly as they like to 
me; I will not listen”. 

Eze 9:1 Then he shouted loudly for me to hear, “The scourges of the city are approaching, each carrying his 
weapon of destruction!”. 

Eze 9:2 Immediately six men advanced from the upper north gate, each holding a deadly weapon. Among them 
was a man dressed in linen, with a scribe’s ink-horn in his belt. They came in and halted in front of the bronze 
altar. 

Eze 9:3 The glory of the God of Israel rose from above the winged creature where it had been, towards the 
threshold of the Temple. He called to the man dressed in linen with a scribe’s ink-horn in his belt 
Eze 9:4 and Yahweh said to him, “Go all through the city, all through Jerusalem, and mark a cross on the 
foreheads of all who grieve and lament over all the loathsome practices in it”. 

Eze 9:5 I heard him say to the others, “Follow him through the city and strike. Not one glance of pity; show no 
mercy; 

Eze 9:6 old men, young men, girls, children, women, kill and exterminate them all. But do not touch anyone with 
a cross on his forehead. Begin at my sanctuary”. So they began with the old men who were in the Temple. 

Eze 9:7 He said to them, “Defile the Temple; fill the courts with corpses; then go out!”. They went out and hacked 
their way through the city. 

Eze 9:8 While they were hacking them down, I was left alone; I fell on my face, crying out, “Ah, Lord Yahweh, 
are you going to annihilate all that is left of Israel by venting your fury on Jerusalem?”. 

Eze 9:9 He said, “The guilt of the House of Israel and Judah is immense; the country is full of bloodshed, the city 
full of perversity, for they say, ‘Yahweh has abandoned the country, Yahweh cannot see’. 

Eze 9:10 Then, I too shall neither give one glance of pity nor show any mercy. I shall repay them for what they 
have done”. 

Eze 9:1 1 The man dressed in linen with the scribe’s ink-horn in his belt then came back and made his report, “I 
have carried out your orders”. 

Eze 10:1 Then, in vision I saw that above the solid surface over the heads of the winged creatures there was 
above them something like sapphire, which seemed to be like a throne. 

Eze 10:2 He then said to the man dressed in linen, “Go in between the wheels below the winged creatures; take 
a handful of burning coal from between the winged creatures and scatter it over the city”. He went in as I 
watched. 

Eze 10:3 The winged creatures were on the right of the Temple as the man went in, and the cloud filled the 
inner court. 

Eze 10:4 The glory of Yahweh rose from above the winged creatures, towards the threshold of the Temple; the 
Temple was filled by the cloud and the court was full of the brightness of the glory of Yahweh. 

Eze 1 0:5 The noise of the winged creatures’ wings could be heard even in the outer court, like the voice of God 
Almighty when he speaks. 

Eze 10:6 When he had given the order to the man dressed in linen, “Take the fire from between the wheels, 
between the winged creatures”, the man went in and stood by one of the wheels. 

Eze 10:7 One of the winged creatures then reached his hand out towards the fire between the winged 
creatures, took some of it and put it into the hands of the man dressed in linen, who took it and came out again. 
Eze 10:8 There appeared to be what looked like a human hand under the winged creatures’ wings. 

Eze 10:9 And I looked, and there were four wheels beside the winged creatures, one wheel beside each winged 
creature, and the appearance of the wheels was like the sparkle of chrysolite. 

Eze 10:10 In appearance, all four looked alike, as though each wheel had another wheel inside it. 

Eze 10:1 1 In whichever of the four directions they moved, they did not need to turn as they moved, but 
whichever way the head was facing there they followed; they did not turn as they moved, 

Eze 10:12 and their entire bodies, their backs, their hands, their wings, as well as the wheels, had eyes all the 
way round (the wheels of all four). 

Eze 10:13 In my hearing, these wheels were called “galgal'. 

Eze 10:14 Each had four faces; the first was a winged creature’s face, the second a human face, the third a 
lion’s face and the fourth an eagle’s face. 

Eze 10:15 The winged creatures rose; this was the being I had seen by the River Chebar. 

Eze 10:16 When the winged creatures moved, the wheels moved beside them; and when the winged creatures 
raised their wings to leave the ground, the wheels did not turn beside them. 

Eze 10:17 When the former halted the latter halted; when the former rose, the latter rose with them, since they 
shared the same living spirit. 

Eze 10:18 The glory of Yahweh then came out over the Temple threshold and paused over the winged 
creatures. 

Eze 10:19 These raised their wings and rose from the ground as I watched, and the wheels were beside them. 



They paused at the entrance to the east gate of the Temple of Yahweh, with the glory of the God of Israel over 
them, above. 

Eze 10:20 This was the winged creature I had seen beneath the God of Israel by the River Chebar; I knew that 
they were winged creatures. 

Eze 1 0:21 Each had four faces and four wings and what seemed to be human hands under their wings. 

Eze 10:22 Their faces were like those I had seen by the River Chebar. Each one moved straight forward. 

Eze 1 1:1 The spirit lifted me up and brought me to the east gate of the Temple of Yahweh, the gate that looks 
eastwards. There at the entrance to the gate stood twenty-five men, among whom I saw Jaazaniah son of Azzur 
and Pelatiah son of Benaiah, leaders of the people. 

Eze 1 1 :2 He said to me, “Son of man, these are the wicked schemers who are spreading their bad advice 
through this city. 

Eze 1 1 :3 They say, ‘There will be no house-building yet awhile. The city is the cooking pot and we are the 
meat’. 

Eze 1 1 :4 So prophesy against them, prophesy, son of man!”. 

Eze 1 1 :5 The spirit of Yahweh fell on me, and he said to me, “Say, ‘Yahweh says this: I know what you are 
saying, House of Israel, I know how insolent you are. 

Eze 1 1 :6 You have filled this city with more and more of your victims; you have strewn its streets with victims. 
Eze 1 1 :7 And so the Lord Yahweh says this: Your victims, whom you have put in it, are the meat, and the city is 
the cooking pot; but I shall take you out of it. 

Eze 1 1 :8 You are afraid of the sword and I shall bring the sword down on you — declares the Lord Yahweh- 
Eze 1 1 :9 and I shall take you out of it and hand you over to foreigners and bring you to justice; 

Eze 11:10 you will fall by the sword on the soil of Israel; I shall execute justice on you, and you will know that I 
am Yahweh. 

Eze 11:11 This city will be no cooking pot for you, nor will you be the meat inside; I shall execute justice on you 
on the soil of Israel; 

Eze 11:12 and you will know that I am Yahweh, whose laws you have not obeyed and whose judgements you 
have not kept; instead, you have adopted the customs of the nations round you’”. 

Eze 11:13 Now as I was prophesying, Pelatiah son of Benaiah dropped dead. I fell to the ground and cried out, 
“Ah, Lord Yahweh, are you going to annihilate the remnant of Israel?”. 

Eze 11:14 The word of Yahweh was then addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 11:15 “Son of man, to your brothers one and all, to your kinsfolk and to the whole House of Israel, the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, ‘Keep well away from Yahweh. This country has now been made over to 
us!’. 

Eze 11:16 So say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Yes, I have sent them far away among the nations and I have 
dispersed them to foreign countries; and for a while I have been a sanctuary for them in the country to which 
they have gone’. 

Eze 11:17 So say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I shall gather you back from the peoples, I shall collect you in 
from the countries where you have been scattered and give you the land of Israel. 

Eze 11:18 When they come back, they will purge it of all its horrors and loathsome practices. 

Eze 11:19 I shall give them a single heart and I shall put a new spirit in them; I shall remove the heart of stone 
from their bodies and give them a heart of flesh, 

Eze 1 1 :20 so that they can keep my laws and respect my judgements and put them into practice. Then they will 
be my people and I shall be their God. 

Eze 1 1 :21 But those whose hearts are set on their horrors and loathsome practices I shall repay for their 
conduct — declares the Lord Yahweh.” “ 

Eze 1 1 :22 The winged creatures then raised their wings and the wheels moved with them, with the glory of the 
God of Israel over them, above. 

Eze 1 1 :23 And the glory of Yahweh rose from the centre of the city and halted on the mountain to the east of the 
city. 

Eze 1 1 :24 Then the spirit lifted me up and took me, in vision, in the spirit of God, to the exiles in Chaldaea, and 
the vision which I had seen faded. 

Eze 1 1 :25 I then told the exiles everything that Yahweh had shown me. 

Eze 12:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 12:2 “Son of man, you are living among a tribe of rebels who have eyes and never see, they have ears and 
never hear, because they are a tribe of rebels. 

Eze 12:3 So, son of man, pack an exile’s bundle and set off for exile by daylight while they watch. You will leave 
your home and go somewhere else while they watch. Then perhaps they will see that they are a tribe of rebels. 
Eze 12:4 You will pack your baggage like an exile’s bundle, by daylight, while they watch, and leave like an exile 
in the evening, while they watch. 



Eze 12:5 While they watch, make a hole in the wall, and go out through it. 

Eze 12:6 While they watch, you will shoulder your pack and go out into the dark; you will cover your face so that 
you cannot see the ground, since I have made you an omen for the House of Israel”. 

Eze 12:7 I did as I had been told. I packed my baggage like an exile’s bundle, by daylight; and in the evening I 
made a hole through the wall with my hands; then I went out into the dark and shouldered my pack while they 
watched. 

Eze 12:8 Next morning the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 12:9 “Son of man, did not the House of Israel, did not that tribe of rebels, ask you, ‘What are you doing?’. 
Eze 12:10 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: This prophecy concerns Jerusalem and the whole House of Israel 
who live there’. 

Eze 12:1 1 Say, ‘I am an omen for you; as I have done, so will be done to them; they will be deported into exile. 
Eze 12:12 Their prince will shoulder his pack in the dark and go out through the wall; a hole will be made to let 
him out; he will cover his face, so that he cannot see the country. 

Eze 12:13 I shall throw my net over him and catch him in my mesh; I shall take him to Babylon, to the land of 
the Chaldaeans, though he will not see it; and there he will die. 

Eze 12:14 And all those in attendance on him, his army and all his troops, I shall scatter to all the winds and 
unsheathe the sword behind them. 

Eze 12:15 Then they will know that I am Yahweh, when I scatter them throughout the nations and disperse them 
in foreign countries. 

Eze 12:16 But I shall let a few of them escape the sword, famine and plague, to describe all their loathsome 
practices to the peoples among whom they will go, so that these too may know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 12:17 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 12:18 “Son of man, you are to tremble as you eat your food and shudder apprehensively as you drink your 
water, 

Eze 12:19 and you are to say to the people of the country, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem. They will shudder apprehensively as they eat their food, and drink their water in fear, so that the 
country and its population may be freed from the violence of its inhabitants. 

Eze 12:20 When the populous cities have been destroyed and the country has been reduced to desert, then you 
will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 12:21 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 12:22 “Son of man, what do you understand by the saying pronounced over the land of Israel, ‘Days go by 
and visions fade?’ 

Eze 12:23 “Very well, tell them, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I shall put an end to this saying; it will never be 
used in Israel again’. Instead, tell them: ‘The days are coming when every vision will come true, 

Eze 12:24 for there will be no more futile visions or deceptive prophecy in the House of Israel, 

Eze 12:25 since I, Yahweh, shall speak. And what I shall say will come true without delay; for what I shall say, I 
shall perform in your own lifetime, you tribe of rebels — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 12:26 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 12:27 “Son of man, the House of Israel is now saying, ‘The vision that this man sees concerns the distant 
future; he is prophesying for times far ahead’. 

Eze 12:28 Very well, tell them, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: There will be no further delay in the fulfilling of any 
of my words. What I have said shall be done now — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 13:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 1 3:2 “Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel; prophesy, and say to those who make up 
prophecies out of their own heads, ‘Hear what Yahweh says: 

Eze 13:3 The Lord Yahweh says this: Disaster is in store for the foolish prophets who follow their own spirit and 
have seen nothing! 

Eze 13:4 Your prophets, Israel, are like ruin-haunting jackals! 

Eze 13:5 ‘You have not ventured into the breach; you have not built up the wall round the House of Israel, to 
hold fast in battle on the Day of Yahweh. 

Eze 13:6 Theirs are futile visions and false predictions, who say: A prophecy from Yahweh, when Yahweh has 
not sent them; yet they expect their words to come true. 

Eze 13:7 Have not the visions you see been futile, have not the predictions you make been false, although you 
say: A prophecy of Yahweh, when I have not spoken? 

Eze 13:8 ‘Very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: Because of your futile words and false predictions, I am now 
against you — declares Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 13:9 My hand will be against the prophets who have futile visions and give false predictions; they will not be 
admitted to the council of my people, their names will not be entered in the roll of the House of Israel, they will 
not set foot on the soil of Israel; and they will know that I am the Lord Yahweh. 



Eze 13:10 This is because they have misled my people by saying Peace! when there is no peace. When my 
people were repairing a wall, these men came and plastered it over! 

Eze 13:1 1 Tell these plasterers: It will rain hard, it will hail, it will blow a gale, 

Eze 13:12 and down will come the wall! Will not people ask you: What has become of the plaster you slapped 
on it? 

Eze 13:13 Well then, the Lord Yahweh says this: I am going to unleash a stormy wind in my fury, torrential rain 
in my anger, hailstones in my destructive fury, 

Eze 13:14 and I shall shatter the wall you plastered and knock it down and lay its foundations bare. It will fall 
and you will perish under it; then you will know that I am Yahweh’. 

Eze 13:15 “When I have sated my anger on the wall and those who plastered it, I shall say to you, ‘The wall is 
gone, and so are those who plastered over it, 

Eze 13:16 the prophets of Israel who prophesy about Jerusalem and have visions of peace for her when there is 
no peace — declares the Lord Yahweh’. 

Eze 13:17 “Also, son of man, turn to the women of your people who make up prophecies out of their own heads; 
prophesy against them. 

Eze 13:18 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Disaster is in store for women who sew ribbons round each wrist 
and make head-cloths for people of all sizes, in their hunt for souls! Are you to hunt the souls of my people and 
keep your own souls safe? 

Eze 13:19 You dishonour me in front of my people for a few handfuls of barley, a few bits of bread, killing those 
who ought not to die and sparing those who ought not to live, lying to my people who love listening to lies. 

Eze 1 3:20 ‘Very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: Look, I am now against your ribbons, with which you hunt 
souls like birds, and I shall tear them off your arms and free those souls whom you hunt like birds. 

Eze 1 3:21 I shall tear your head-cloths to pieces and rescue my people from your clutches; no longer will they 
be fair game for you to ensnare. Then you will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 13:22 ‘For having intimidated with lies the heart of the upright whom I had done nothing to alarm, and for 
having encouraged the wicked not to give up wicked ways and so be saved, 

Eze 13:23 very well, you will have no more futile visions and make no more predictions, for I shall rescue my 
people from your clutches, and you will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 14:1 Next, some elders of Israel visited me and while they were sitting with me, 

Eze 14:2 the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 14:3 “Son of man, these men have enshrined their foul idols in their hearts and placed the cause of their 
sinning right before their eyes. Why should I let myself be consulted by them? 

Eze 14:4 So speak to them; tell them this, ‘Lord Yahweh says this: Every member of the House of Israel who 
enshrines his foul idols in his heart and places the cause of his sinning right before his eyes, and who then 
approaches the prophet, will get this answer from me, Yahweh, as the multiplicity of his idols deserves, 

Eze 14:5 and in this way I hope to win back the hearts of the House of Israel who have all been estranged from 
me by their foul idols’. 

Eze 14:6 “So say to the House of Israel, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Come back, turn away from your foul 
idols, turn your backs on all your loathsome practices; 

Eze 14:7 for if any member of the House of Israel — or any foreigner living in Israel — deserts me to enshrine his 
foul idols in his heart and places the cause of his sinning right before his eyes and then approaches a prophet to 
consult me through him, he will get his answer from me, Yahweh. 

Eze 14:8 I shall set my face against that person; I shall make him an example and a byword; I shall rid my 
people of him, and you will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 14:9 And if the prophet is seduced into saying something, I, Yahweh, shall have seduced that prophet; I 
shall point my finger at him and rid my people Israel of him. 

Eze 14:10 Both will be punished for their guilt; the prophet’s punishment will be the same as that of the person 
who consults him, 

Eze 14:1 1 so that the House of Israel will never stray from me again or defile themselves again with these 
crimes, but be my people and I their God — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 14:12 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me: 

Eze 14:13 “Son of man, when a country sins against me by being unfaithful and I point my finger at it and 
destroy its supply of food, inflicting famine on it and denuding it of human and animal, 

Eze 14:14 even if the three men, Noah, Danel and Job, were living in it, they would save no one but themselves 
by their uprightness — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 14:15 Were I to unleash wild beasts on that country to rob it of its children and reduce it to a desert which 
no one would dare to cross because of the animals, 

Eze 14:16 even if these three men were living there, as I live — declares the Lord Yahweh — they would not be 
able to save either son or daughter; they alone would be saved, and the country would become a desert. 



Eze 14:17 Were I to bring the sword down on that country and say, ‘Sword, cross the country!’. so as to denude 
it of human and animal, 

Eze 14:18 even if these three men were living there, as I live — declares the Lord Yahweh — they would not be 
able to save either son or daughter; they alone would be saved. 

Eze 14:19 If I were to send the plague on that country and vent my fury on it by bloodshed, so as to denude it of 
human and animal, 

Eze 14:20 even if Noah and Danel and Job were living there, as I live — declares the Lord Yahweh — they would 
be able to save neither son nor daughter, only themselves by their uprightness. 

Eze 14:21 “The Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Even if I send my four dreadful scourges on Jerusalem-sword, famine, 
wild beasts and plague — to denude it of human and animal, 

Eze 14:22 even so, there will be a remnant left, a few men and women who come through; when they come to 
you and you see their conduct and actions, you will take comfort in spite of the disaster which I have brought on 
Jerusalem, in spite of all I have brought on her. 

Eze 14:23 They will comfort you, when you see their conduct and actions, and so you will know that I have not 
done in vain all I have done to her — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 15:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows: 

Eze 1 5:2 Son of man, how is the wood of the vine better than wood from the branch of a forest tree? 

Eze 15:3 Is its wood used for making anything? Are pegs on which to hang things made from it? 

Eze 15:4 There it is, thrown on the fire for fuel. The fire burns off both ends; the middle is charred; can it be kept 
for anything now? 

Eze 15:5 While it was intact, you could make nothing with it; burned and charred, is it any more useful now? 

Eze 15:6 So, the Lord Yahweh says this: As the wood of the vine among the forest trees, which I have thrown 
on the fire for fuel, so shall I treat the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 

Eze 1 5:7 I shall set my face against them. They have escaped one fire, but fire will devour them yet. And you 
will know that I am Yahweh, when I set my face against them. 

Eze 15:8 I shall reduce the country to a desert, because of their infidelity- declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 16:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 16:2 “Son of man, confront Jerusalem with her loathsome practices! 

Eze 16:3 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: By origin and birth you belong to the land of Canaan. Your father 
was an Amorite and your mother a Hittite. 

Eze 16:4 At birth, the very day you were born, there was no one to cut your navel-string, or wash you in water to 
clean you, or rub you with salt, or wrap you in swaddling clothes. 

Eze 16:5 No one looked at you with pity enough to do any of these things out of sympathy for you. You were 
exposed in the open fields in your own dirt on the day you were born. 

Eze 16:6 ‘I saw you kicking on the ground in your blood as I was passing, and I said to you as you lay in your 
blood: Live! 

Eze 16:7 and I made you grow like the grass of the fields. You developed, you grew, you reached marriageable 
age. Your breasts became firm and your hair grew richly, but you were stark naked. 

Eze 16:8 Then I saw you as I was passing. Your time had come, the time for love. I spread my cloak over you 
and covered your nakedness; I gave you my oath, I made a covenant with you — declares the Lord Yahweh — 
and you became mine. 

Eze 16:9 I bathed you in water, I washed the blood off you, I anointed you with oil. 

Eze 16:10 I gave you embroidered dresses, fine leather shoes, a linen headband and a cloak of silk. 

Eze 16:1 1 I loaded you with jewels, gave you bracelets for your wrists and a necklace for your throat. 

Eze 16:12 I gave you nose-ring and earrings; I put a beautiful diadem on your head. 

Eze 16:13 You were loaded with gold and silver and dressed in linen and silk and brocade. Your food was the 
finest flour, honey and oil. You grew more and more beautiful; and you rose to be queen. 

Eze 16:14 The fame of your beauty spread through the nations, since it was perfect, because I had clothed you 
with my own splendour — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 16:15 ‘But you became infatuated with your own beauty and used your fame to play the whore, lavishing 
your debauchery on all comers. 

Eze 16:16 You took some of your clothes to make for yourself high places bright with colours and there you 
played the whore. 

Eze 16:17 You also took your jewellery, made with my gold and silver which I had given you, and made yourself 
male images to serve your whorings. 

Eze 16:18 You took your embroidered clothes and used these to dress them up, and you offered them my oil 
and my incense. 

Eze 16:19 And the bread I gave you, the finest flour, the oil and honey with which I fed you, you offered them as 
a pleasing smell. ‘What is more — declares the Lord Yahweh- 



Eze 16:20 you took the sons and daughters you had borne me and sacrificed them as food to the images. Was 
not your whoring enough in itself, 

Eze 16:21 for you to slaughter my children and hand them over to be burnt in their honour? 

Eze 16:22 And in all your loathsome practices and your whorings you never called your early days to mind, 
when you were stark naked, kicking on the ground in your own blood. 

Eze 16:23 ‘To crown your wickedness — disaster upon you, disaster! declares the Lord Yahweh- 
Eze 16:24 you built yourself a mound and made yourself a high place in every open space. 

Eze 16:25 At the entry to every alley you made yourself a high place, defiling your beauty and opening your legs 
to all comers in countless acts of fornication. 

Eze 16:26 You have also fornicated with your big-membered neighbours, the Egyptians, provoking my anger 
with further acts of fornication. 

Eze 16:27 So now I have raised my hand against you, I have cut down on your food, I have put you at the 
mercy of your enemies, the Philistine women, who blush at your lewd behaviour. 

Eze 16:28 Still unsatisfied, you prostituted yourself to the Assyrians; you played the whore with them, but were 
not satisfied even then. 

Eze 16:29 You committed further acts of fornication in the country of merchants, with the Chaldaeans, and 
these did not satisfy you either. 

Eze 16:30 ‘How simple-minded you arel-declares the Lord Yahweh — for although you do all the things that a 
professional prostitute would, 

Eze 16:31 in building a mound and making yourself a high place in every street, you do not act like a proper 
prostitute because you disdain to take a fee. 

Eze 16:32 An adulteress welcomes strangers instead of her husband. 

Eze 16:33 All prostitutes accept presents, but you give presents to all your lovers, you bribe them to come from 
all over the place to fornicate with you! 

Eze 16:34 In fornicating, you are the opposite of other women, since no one runs after you to fornicate with you; 
since you give the fee and do not get one, you are the very opposite! 

Eze 16:35 ‘Very well, whore, hear the word of Yahweh! 

Eze 16:36 The Lord Yahweh says this: For having squandered your money and let yourself be seen naked 
while whoring with your lovers and all the foul idols of your loathsome practices and for giving them your 
children’s blood- 

Eze 16:37 for all this, I shall assemble all the lovers to whom you have given pleasure, all the ones you liked 
and also all the ones you disliked; yes, I shall assemble them round you and strip you naked in front of them, 
and let them see you naked from head to foot. 

Eze 16:38 I shall pass on you the sentence that adulteresses and murderesses receive; I shall hand you over to 
their jealous fury; 

Eze 16:39 I shall hand you over to them; they will destroy your mound and pull down your high place; they will 
tear off your clothes, take away your jewels and leave you stark naked. 

Eze 16:40 Then they will call an assembly of citizens to deal with you, who will stone you to death and hack you 
to pieces with their swords, 

Eze 16:41 and burn down your premises and execute justice on you, while many other women look on; and I 
shall put an end to your whoring: no more paid lovers for you! 

Eze 16:42 Once my fury is exhausted with you, then my jealousy will leave you; I shall be calm and not angry 
any more. 

Eze 16:43 Since you never called to mind your early days and have done nothing but provoke me, now I in my 
turn shall bring your conduct down on your own head — declares the Lord Yahweh! ‘Have you not added this 
lewd behaviour to your other loathsome practices? 

Eze 16:44 So now all dealers in proverbs will apply this one to you: Like mother, like daughter. 

Eze 16:45 Yes; you are a true daughter of your mother, who hated her husband and her children; you are a true 
sister of your sisters, who hated their husbands and their children. Your mother was a Hittite and your father an 
Amorite. 

Eze 16:46 Your elder sister is Samaria, who lives to the north of you with her daughters. Your younger sister is 
Sodom, who lives to the south of you with her daughters. 

Eze 16:47 You never failed to imitate their behaviour and copy their loathsome practices, and soon your 
behaviour was more corrupt than theirs was. 

Eze 16:48 As I live - declares the Lord Yahweh — your sister Sodom and her daughters never did what you and 
your daughters have done. 

Eze 16:49 The crime of your sister Sodom was pride, gluttony, calm complacency; such were hers and her 
daughters’ crimes. They never helped the poor and needy; 

Eze 16:50 they were proud, and engaged in loathsome practices before me, and so I swept them away as you 



have seen. 

Eze 16:51 And yet Samaria never committed half the crimes that you have. ‘You have done more loathsome 
things than they have. By all your loathsome practices you have made your sisters seem innocent, 

Eze 1 6:52 and now you bear the shame of which you have freed your sisters; since the sins which you have 
committed are more revolting than theirs, they are more upright than you are. So now, bear the disgrace and 
shame of having put your sisters in the right. 

Eze 16:53 ‘I shall restore their fortunes, I shall restore Sodom and her daughters, I shall re- store Samaria and 
her daughters, and then I shall restore your fortune with theirs, 

Eze 16:54 so that you can bear your shame and disgrace for all you have done, and so console them. 

Eze 16:55 When your sisters, Sodom and her daughters, are restored to what they were, and Samaria and her 
daughters are restored to what they were, then you too and your daughters will be restored to what you were. 
Eze 16:56 Did you not gloat over your sister Sodom when you were so proud, 

Eze 16:57 before you were stripped naked? Like her, you are now the laughing-stock of the women of Edom, of 
all the women round, of the women of Philistia, who pour out their contempt on you. 

Eze 16:58 You have brought this on yourself, with your lewdness and your loathsome practices — declares the 
Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 16:59 ‘For the Lord Yahweh says this: I shall treat you as you have deserved for making light of an oath 
and breaking a covenant, 

Eze 16:60 but I shall remember my covenant with you when you were a girl and shall conclude a covenant with 
you that will last for ever. 

Eze 16:61 And you for your part will remember your behaviour and feel ashamed of it when you receive your 
elder and younger sisters and I make them your daughters, although this is not included in my covenant with 
you. 

Eze 16:62 I shall renew my covenant with you; and you will know that I am Yahweh, 

Eze 16:63 and so remember and feel ashamed and in your confusion be reduced to silence, when I forgive you 
for everything you have done — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 17:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 17:2 “Son of man, put a riddle, propound a parable to the House of Israel. 

Eze 17:3 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: A great eagle with great wings, long-pinioned, rich with many- 
coloured plumage, came to the Lebanon. 

Eze 17:4 He took the top of the cedar tree, he plucked off the top branch, he carried it off to the country of 
merchants and set it down in a city of shopkeepers. 

Eze 17:5 Next, he took one of the country’s seeds and put it in a fertile field; by the side of a generous stream, 
like a willow tree, he placed it. 

Eze 17:6 It grew and became a fruitful vine of modest size, grew up towards the eagle, its roots grew 
downwards. So it became a vine, branching out and sprouting new shoots. 

Eze 17:7 But there was another great eagle with great wings and thick plumage. And now the vine twisted its 
roots towards him and stretched its branches towards him, for him to water it away from the bed where it was 
planted. 

Eze 17:8 It was in a fertile field, by the side of a wide stream that the vine had been planted, to branch out and 
bear fruit and become a noble vine’. 

Eze 17:9 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Will it succeed? Will the eagle not tear out its roots and strip off its 
fruit, so that all the new leaves it puts out will wither, and no great strength is needed nor many people to pull it 
up by the roots? 

Eze 17:10 Planted it may be — will it succeed? Will it not shrivel up when the east wind blows? It will wither in 
the bed where it was growing!’”. 

Eze 17:11 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows: 

Eze 17:12 “Say to that tribe of rebels, ‘Do you not know what this means?’. Say this, “Look, the king of Babylon 
came to Jerusalem; he carried away the king and the princes, and took them to his home in Babylon. 

Eze 17:13 He took a member of the royal family and made a treaty with him, forcing him to swear loyalty, having 
already deported the leading men of the country, 

Eze 17:14 so that the kingdom would remain modest and without ambitions, and would keep and honour his 
treaty. 

Eze 17:15 But the prince rebelled against him and sent envoys to Egypt to procure himself horses and a large 
number of troops. Will he succeed? Will a man who has done this go unpunished? Can he break a treaty and go 
unpunished? 

Eze 17:16 As I live, I swear it - declares the Lord Yahweh — in Babylon, in the country of the king who put him 
on the throne, whose oath he has disregarded and whose treaty he has broken, there he will die. 

Eze 17:17 Despite the pharaoh’s great army and hordes of men, he will not be able to save him by fighting, 



however many earthworks are raised, however many trenches dug to the loss of many lives. 

Eze 17:18 He has disregarded the oath by breaking the treaty to which he had pledged himself and, having 
done all this, will not go unpunished. 

Eze 17:19 ‘So, the Lord Yahweh says this: As I live, I swear it: my oath which he has disregarded, my treaty 
which he has broken, I shall make them both recoil on his own head. 

Eze 17:20 I shall throw my net over him, he will be caught in my mesh; I shall take him to Babylon and punish 
him there for being unfaithful to me. 

Eze 17:21 All the pick of all his troops will fall by the sword, and the survivors be scattered to all the winds. And 
you will know that I, Yahweh, have spoken. 

Eze 17:22 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: From the top of the tall cedar tree, from the highest branch I shall take a 
shoot and plant it myself on a high and lofty mountain. 

Eze 17:23 I shall plant it on the highest mountain in Israel. It will put out branches and bear fruit and grow into a 
noble cedar tree. Every kind of bird will live beneath it, every kind of winged creature will rest in the shade of its 
branches. 

Eze 17:24 And all the trees of the countryside will know that I, Yahweh, am the one who lays the tall tree low 
and raises the low tree high, who makes the green tree wither and makes the withered bear fruit. I, Yahweh, 
have spoken, and I will do it’”. 

Eze 18:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 18:2 “Why do you keep repeating this proverb in the land of Israel: The parents have eaten unripe grapes; 
and the children’s teeth are set on edge? 

Eze 18:3 “As I live — declares the Lord Yahweh — you will have no further cause to repeat this proverb in Israel. 
Eze 18:4 Look, all life belongs to me; the father’s life and the son’s life, both alike belong to me. The one who 
has sinned is the one to die. 

Eze 18:5 “But if a man is upright, his actions law-abiding and upright, 

Eze 18:6 and he does not eat on the mountains or raise his eyes to the foul idols of the House of Israel, does 
not defile his neighbour’s wife or touch a woman during her periods, 

Eze 18:7 oppresses no one, returns the pledge on a debt, does not rob, gives his own food to the hungry, his 
clothes to those who lack clothing, 

Eze 18:8 does not lend for profit, does not charge interest, abstains from evil, gives honest judgement between 
one person and another, 

Eze 18:9 keeps my laws and sincerely respects my judgements — someöne like this is truly upright and will live 
— declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 18:10 “But if he has a son prone to violence and bloodshed, who commits one of these misdeeds- 
Eze 18:11 even though the father never has — a son who dares to eat on the mountains, who defiles his 
neighbour’s wife, 

Eze 18:12 who oppresses the poor and needy, robs, fails to return pledges, raises his eyes to foul idols, 
engages in loathsome practices, 

Eze 18:13 lends for profit, or charges interest, such a person will by no means live; having committed all these 
appalling crimes he will die, and his blood be on his own head. 

Eze 18:14 “But if he in turn has a son who, in spite of seeing all the sins that his father has committed, does not 
imitate him, 

Eze 18:15 does not eat on the mountains or raise his eyes to the foul idols of the House of Israel, does not 
defile his neighbour’s wife, 

Eze 18:16 oppresses no one, takes no pledges, does not rob, gives his own food to the hungry, his clothes to 
those who lack clothing, 

Eze 18:17 abstains from evil, does not lend for profit or charge interest, respects my judgements and keeps my 
laws, he will not die for his father’s sins: he will most certainly live. 

Eze 18:18 But his father, because he was violent, robbed others and never did good among his people, will 
most certainly die in his guilt. 

Eze 18:19 “Now, you say, ‘Why doesn’t the son bear his father’s guilt?’. If the son has been law-abiding and 
upright, has kept all my laws and followed them, most certainly he will live. 

Eze 1 8:20 The one who has sinned is the one who must die; a son is not to bear his father’s guilt, nor a father 
his son’s guilt. The upright will be credited with his uprightness, and the wicked with his wickedness. 

Eze 18:21 “If the wicked, however, renounces all the sins he has committed, respects my laws and is law- 
abiding and upright, he will most certainly live; he will not die. 

Eze 1 8:22 None of the crimes he committed will be remembered against him from then on; he will most certainly 
live because of his upright actions. 

Eze 18:23 Would I take pleasure in the death of the wicked — declares the Lord Yahweh - and not prefer to see 
him renounce his wickedness and live? 



Eze 18:24 “But if the upright abandons uprightness and does wrong by copying all the loathsome practices of 
the wicked, is he to live? All his upright actions will be forgotten from then on; for the infidelity of which he is 
guilty and the sin which he has committed, he will most certainly die. 

Eze 1 8:25 “Now, you say, ‘What the Lord does is unjust’. Now listen, House of Israel: is what I do unjust? Is it 
not what you do that is unjust? 

Eze 18:26 When the upright abandons uprightness and does wrong and dies, he dies because of the wrong 
which he himself has done. 

Eze 18:27 Similarly, when the wicked abandons wickedness to become law-abiding and upright, he saves his 
own life. 

Eze 18:28 Having chosen to renounce all his previous crimes, he will most certainly live: he will not die. 

Eze 18:29 And yet the House of Israel says, ‘What the Lord does is unjust’. Is what I do unjust, House of Israel? 
Is it not what you do that is unjust? 

Eze 18:30 So in future, House of Israel, I shall judge each of you by what that person does — declares the Lord 
Yahweh. Repent, renounce all your crimes, avoid all occasions for guilt. 

Eze 1 8:31 Shake off all the crimes you have committed, and make yourselves a new heart and a new spirit! 

Why die, House of Israel? 

Eze 1 8:32 I take no pleasure in the death of anyone — declares the Lord Yahweh — so repent and live!”. 

Eze 19:1 “Now, raise a lament for the princes of Israel. 

Eze 19:2 Say: What was your mother? A lioness among lions; lying among the cubs she nursed her whelps. 

Eze 1 9:3 She reared one of her whelps: he grew into a young lion; he learnt to tear his prey; he became a man- 
eater. 

Eze 19:4 The nations came to hear of him; he was caught in their pit; they dragged him away with hooks to 
Egypt. 

Eze 1 9:5 Her expectation thwarted, and seeing her hope dashed, she took another of her whelps and made a 
young lion of him. 

Eze 19:6 He prowled among the lions, he grew into a young lion, he learnt to tear his prey; he became a man- 
eater. 

Eze 19:7 He tore down their palaces, he destroyed their cities; the land and all its inhabitants were appalled by 
the sound of his roars. 

Eze 19:8 The nations marched out against him from the surrounding provinces; they spread their net over him; 
he was caught in their pit. 

Eze 19:9 They shackled him with hooks, they took him to the king of Babylon and threw him into a fortress, so 
that his voice could never again be heard on the mountains of Israel. 

Eze 19:10 Your mother was like a vine planted beside the water, fruitful and leafy, because the water flowed so 
full. 

Eze 19:1 1 She had stout stems which became kingly sceptres; she grew higher and higher, up into the clouds; 
she was admired for her height and the number of her branches. 

Eze 19:12 But she was furiously uprooted and thrown on the ground; the east wind dried up her fruit, she was 
broken to pieces; her stout stem dried up, the fire devoured it. 

Eze 19:13 Now she has been transplanted to the desert, to a dry and thirsty land. 

Eze 19:14 Fire burst out of her stem devouring her branches and fruit. No more stout stem for her, no more 
kingly sceptre”. This is a lament; it was used as such. 

Eze 20:1 In the seventh year, on the tenth day of the fifth month, some of the elders of Israel came to consult 
Yahweh and were sitting with me, 

Eze 20:2 when the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 20:3 “Son of man, speak to the elders of Israel. Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Have you come to 
consult me? As I live, I will not be consulted by you — declares the Lord Yahweh’. 

Eze 20:4 “Are you ready to judge them? Are you ready to judge them, son of man? Confront them with the 
loathsome practices of their ancestors. 

Eze 20:5 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: On the day when I chose Israel, when I pledged my word to the 
House of Jacob, I made myself known to them in Egypt; I pledged my word to them and said: I am Yahweh your 
God. 

Eze 20:6 That day I pledged them my word that I would bring them out of Egypt to a country which I had 
reconnoitred for them, a country flowing with milk and honey, and the loveliest of them all. 

Eze 20:7 And I said to them: Each of you must reject the horrors which attract you; do not pollute yourselves 
with the foul idols of Egypt; I am Yahweh your God. 

Eze 20:8 But they rebelled against me and would not listen to me. Not one of them rejected the horrors which 
attracted them; they did not give up the foul idols of Egypt. I then resolved to vent my fury on them, to sate my 
anger on them in Egypt. 



Eze 20:9 But respect for my own name kept me from letting it be profaned in the eyes of the nations among 
whom they were living, and before whom I had made myself known to them and promised to bring them out of 
Egypt. 

Eze 20:10 So I brought them out of Egypt and led them into the desert. 

Eze 20:1 1 I gave them my laws and taught them my judgements, in whose observance people find life. 

Eze 20:12 And I also gave them my Sabbaths as a sign between me and them, so that they might know that I, 
Yahweh, am the one who sanctifies them. 

Eze 20:13 The House of Israel, however, rebelled against me in the desert; they refused to keep my laws, they 
scorned my judgements, in whose observance people find life, and they grossly profaned my Sabbaths. I then 
resolved to vent my fury on them in the desert and destroy them. 

Eze 20:14 But respect for my own name kept me from letting it be profaned in the eyes of the nations, before 
whom I had brought them out. 

Eze 20:15 Even so, I pledged them my word in the desert that I would not lead them to the country which I had 
given them, a country flowing with milk and honey, and the loveliest of them all, 

Eze 20:16 since they had scorned my judgements, had refused to keep my laws and had profaned my 
Sabbaths, their hearts being attached to foul idols. 

Eze 20:17 In spite of this, I took pity on them; I refrained from destroying them and did not make an end of them 
in the desert. 

Eze 20:18 ‘I said to their children in the desert: Do not follow the laws of your ancestors, do not practise their 
judgements, do not defile yourselves with their foul idols. 

Eze 20:19 I am Yahweh your God. Keep my laws, respect my judgements and practise them. 

Eze 20:20 Keep my Sabbaths holy; let them be a sign between me and you, so that people may know that I am 
Yahweh your God. 

Eze 20:21 Their children, however, rebelled against me; they refused to keep my laws, they did not respect or 
practise my judgements, which must be practised by all who want to live; they profaned my Sabbaths. I then 
resolved to vent my fury on them, to sate my anger on them in the desert. 

Eze 20:22 But I restrained my hand; respect for my own name kept me from letting it be profaned in the eyes of 
the nations, before whom I had brought them out. 

Eze 20:23 Once again, however, I pledged them my word that I would scatter them throughout the nations and 
disperse them in foreign countries, 

Eze 20:24 because they had not followed my judgements but had rejected my laws and profaned my Sabbaths, 
their eyes being fastened on the foul idols of their ancestors. 

Eze 20:25 And for this reason I gave them laws that were not good and judgements by which they could never 
live; 

Eze 20:26 and I polluted them with their own offerings, making them sacrifice every first-born son in order to fill 
them with revulsion, so that they would know that I am Yahweh’. 

Eze 20:27 “For this reason, son of man, speak to the House of Israel. Say to them, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: 
Here is another way by which your ancestors outraged me by their infidelity. 

Eze 20:28 Once I had brought them into the country which I had pledged my word to give them, they then saw 
all sorts of high hills, all kinds of leafy trees, and there they performed their sacrifices and made offerings that 
provoked my anger; there they set out their pleasing smell and poured their libations. 

Eze 20:29 I then said to them: What is this high place where you go? And they gave, and still give it, the name 
of Bamah’. 

Eze 20:30 “So, say to the House of Israel, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: If you are polluting yourselves as your 
ancestors did by fornicating with their horrors- 

Eze 20:31 for by offering your gifts and by burning your children as sacrifices, you have been polluting 
yourselves with all your foul idols to this very day — shall I let myself be consulted by you, House of Israel? As I 
live — declares Lord Yahweh — 1 shall not let myself be consulted by you. 

Eze 20:32 And what you sometimes imagine will never be so, when you say: We shall be like the peoples, the 
tribes of foreign lands, worshipping wood and stone. 

Eze 20:33 As I live I swear it — declares the Lord Yahweh — I am the one who will reign over you, with a strong 
hand and outstretched arm, once my fury is sated. 

Eze 20:34 With a strong hand and outstretched arm, once my fury is sated, I shall bring you back from the 
peoples and gather you again from the countries throughout which you have been scattered. 

Eze 20:35 I shall lead you into the desert of the nations and there I shall judge you face to face. 

Eze 20:36 As I judged your ancestors in the desert of Egypt, so will I judge you — declares the Lord Yahweh. 
Eze 20:37 I shall make you pass under the crook, bring you to respect the covenant 

Eze 20:38 and rid you of the rebels who have revolted against me; I shall bring them out of the country where 
they are staying, but they will not enter the country of Israel, and you will know that I am Yahweh. 



Eze 20:39 House of Israel, Lord Yahweh says this: Go on, all of you, worship your foul idols, but later we shall 
see if you don’t listen to me! Then you will stop profaning my holy name with your offerings and your foul idols. 
Eze 20:40 For on my holy mountain, on the high mountain of Israel — declares the Lord Yahweh — is where the 
whole House of Israel, everyone in the country, will worship me. There I shall accept and there expect your 
presents, your choicest offering and all your consecrated gifts. 

Eze 20:41 I shall welcome you like a pleasing smell when I bring you back from the peoples and gather you 
from the countries throughout which you have been scattered, and through you I shall display my holiness for all 
the nations to see; 

Eze 20:42 and you will know that I am Yahweh, when I bring you back to the soil of Israel, to the country which I 
pledged my word to give to your ancestors. 

Eze 20:43 There you will remember your past behaviour and all the actions by which you have defiled 
yourselves, and you will loathe yourselves for all the wrongs which you have committed. 

Eze 20:44 And you will know that I am Yahweh, when I treat you as respect for my own name requires, and not 
as your wicked behaviour and corrupt actions deserve, House of Israel — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 21:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 21 :2 “Son of man, turn to the right; utter your word towards the south, prophesy against the forest land of 
the Negeb. 

Eze 21 :3 Say to the forest of Negeb, ‘Hear the word of Yahweh! The Lord Yahweh says this: Listen; I am about 
to kindle a fire in you which will burn up every green tree in you as well as every dry one; it will be an 
unquenchable blaze and every face will be scorched by it from the Negeb to the north. 

Eze 21 :4 All humanity will see that it was I, Yahweh, who kindled it, and it will not be extinguished’”. 

Eze 21 :5 I said, “Lord Yahweh, they say of me, ‘He does nothing but speak in riddles!’”. 

Eze 21 :6 Then the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 21 :7 “Son of man, turn towards Jerusalem, utter your word towards the sanctuary and prophesy against the 
land of Israel. 

Eze 21 :8 Say to the land of Israel, ‘Yahweh says this: Now I am against you; I am about to unsheathe my sword 
and rid you of the upright and the wicked alike. 

Eze 21 :9 Since I am going to rid you of upright and wicked alike, I shall unsheathe my sword against everyone 
alive, from the Negeb to the north, 

Eze 21:10 so that everyone alive will know that I, Yahweh, am the one who has unsheathed my sword; it will not 
go back again’. 

Eze 21:11 “Son of man, groan as though your heart were breaking. Litter your bitter groans where they can see 
you. 

Eze 21:12 And if they say, ‘Why these groans?’. reply, ‘Because of the news which is about to come, all hearts 
will sink, all hands grow weak, all spirits grow faint and all knees turn to water. It is coming now, it is here!- 
declares Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 21:13 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 21:14 “Son of man, prophesy. Say, ‘The Lord says this. Say: The sword, the sword has been sharpened 
and polished, 

Eze 21:15 sharpened for slaughter, polished to flash like lightning … 

Eze 21:16 He has had it polished to be wielded, this sword sharpened and polished to put in the slaughterer’s 
hand! 

Eze 21:17 Shout and wail, son of man, for it will come on my people, on all the chief men of Israel doomed like 
my people to the sword! So beat your breast, 

Eze 21:18 for this will be an ordeal … declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 21:19 So prophesy, son of man, and clap your hands! Let the sword pass three times, that sword for 
victims, that sword for a great victim, threatening them from every side! 

Eze 21:20 To make hearts sink and make sure many fall, I have posted the slaughtering sword at every gate to 
flash like lightning, polished for slaughter. 

Eze 21 :21 Be sharp, on the right, be ready on the left, whichever way your blade is needed! 

Eze 21 :22 I too shall clap my hands and sate my fury! I, Yahweh, have spoken’”. 

Eze 21 :23 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 21 :24 “Son of man, mark out two roads for the sword of the king of Babylon to come along, making both of 
them begin from the same country. Then put up a signpost, put it where the road leaves for the city, 

Eze 21 :25 trace the route which the sword should take for Rabbah-of-the-Ammonites, and for Judah, to the 
fortress of Jerusalem. 

Eze 21 :26 For the king of Babylon has halted at the fork where these two roads diverge, to take the omens. He 
has shaken the arrows, questioned the household gods, inspected the liver. 

Eze 21 :27 The lot marked “Jerusalem” is in his right hand: there to set up battering-rams, give the word for 



slaughter, raise the war cry, level battering-rams against the gates, cast up earthworks, build entrenchments. 

Eze 21 :28 The inhabitants will believe that these omens are idle, for they have received sworn guarantees, but 
he will bring their guilt to mind and capture them. 

Eze 21 :29 And so the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Since you have brought your guilt to mind by parading your 
misdeeds and flaunting your sins in everything you do: because you have drawn attention to yourselves, you will 
be captured. 

Eze 21:30 As for you, impious and wicked prince of Israel, whose doom is approaching to put an end to your 
crimes, 

Eze 21 :31 the Lord Yahweh says this: They will take away your diadem and remove your crown. Everything will 
be changed; the low will be raised and the high brought low! 

Eze 21:32 Ruin, ruin, I shall bring such ruin as never was before, until the rightful ruler comes, on whom I shall 
bestow it’. 

Eze 21:33 “Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: In reply to the Ammonites and their 
jeers, say: The sword, the sword is drawn for slaughter, polished to devour, to flash like lightning- 
Eze 21 :34 while you have empty visions and consult lying omens-to cut the throats of the wicked, whose doom 
is approaching to put an end to their crimes. 

Eze 21 :35 Put it back in the scabbard. The place where you were created, the land of your origin, will be where I 
judge you. 

Eze 21 :36 I shall vent my fury on you, breathe the fire of my rage against you and hand you over to barbarous 
men whose trade is destruction. 

Eze 21:37 You will be fuel for the fire, your blood will flow through the country, you will leave no memory behind 
you; for I, Yahweh, have spoken!’”. 

Eze 22:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 22:2 “Son of man, are you ready to judge? Are you ready to judge the blood-stained city? Confront her with 
all her loathsome practices! 

Eze 22:3 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: City shedding blood inside yourself to hasten your doom, making 
foul idols on your soil to defile yourself, 

Eze 22:4 you have incurred guilt by the blood you have shed, you have defiled yourself with the foul idols you 
have made, you have shortened your days, you have come to the end of your years. This is why I have made 
you an object of scorn to the nations and a laughing-stock to every country. 

Eze 22:5 From far and near they will taunt you with your infamous disorders. 

Eze 22:6 ‘Look! In you the princes of Israel, one and all, have furthered their own interests at the cost of 
bloodshed; 

Eze 22:7 in you people have despised their fathers and mothers; in you they have ill-treated the settler; in you 
they have oppressed the widow and orphan. 

Eze 22:8 You have treated my sanctuary with contempt, you have profaned my Sabbaths. 

Eze 22:9 In you informers incite to bloodshed; in you people eat on the mountains and act licentiously; 

Eze 22:10 in you they have sexual intercourse with their fathers; in you they force themselves on women in their 
periods; 

Eze 22:1 1 in you one man engages in loathsome practices with his neighbour’s wife, another lewdly defiles his 
daughter-in-law, another violates his sister, his own father’s daughter. 

Eze 22:12 In you people take bribes for shedding blood; you lend for profit and charge interest, you profit from 
your fellow by extortion and have forgotten about me — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 22:13 ‘Now I shall clap my hands at your acts of banditry and the blood that flows in you. 

Eze 22:14 Will your heart be able to resist, will your hands be steady, the day when I call you to account? I, 
Yahweh, have spoken and shall act. 

Eze 22:15 I shall scatter you among the nations and disperse you in foreign countries, and so put an end to the 
filthiness now inside you; 

Eze 22:16 through your own fault, you will be profaned in the eyes of the nations, and you will know that I am 
Yahweh!’”. 

Eze 22:17 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 22:18 “Son of man, for me, the Flouse of Israel has become dross: copper, tin, iron, lead, all mixed up 
together in the melting-pot; they are dross. 

Eze 22:19 And so, Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Since you have all become dross, right! I shall collect you inside 
Jerusalem. 

Eze 22:20 As silver, copper, iron, lead and tin are collected in the melting-pot, and the fire is blown underneath 
to melt them down, so I shall collect you in my furious anger and have you melted down; 

Eze 22:21 I shall collect you and blow up the fire of my rage for you and have you melted down inside the city. 
Eze 22:22 As silver is melted in the melting-pot, so you will be melted down inside the city, and you will know 



that I, Yahweh, have vented my fury on you’”. 

Eze 22:23 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 22:24 “Son of man, say to her, ‘You are a land that has not received rain or shower on the day of anger. 
Eze 22:25 In you, the princes are like a roaring lion tearing its prey. They have eaten the people, seized wealth 
and jewels and widowed many inside her. 

Eze 22:26 Her priests have violated my law and desecrated my sanctuary; they have made no distinction 
between sacred and profane, they have not taught people the difference between clean and unclean; they have 
turned their eyes away from my Sabbaths and I have been dishonoured by them. 

Eze 22:27 In her the leaders are wolves tearing their prey, shedding blood and killing people to steal their 
possessions. 

Eze 22:28 Her prophets have plastered these things over with their empty visions and lying prophecies, saying: 
Yahweh says this, although Yahweh has not spoken. 

Eze 22:29 The people of the country have taken to extortion and banditry; they have oppressed the poor and 
needy and ill-treated the settler in a way that is unjustifiable. 

Eze 22:30 I have been looking for someöne among them to build a barricade and oppose me in the breach, to 
defend the country and prevent me from destroying it; but I have found no one. 

Eze 22:31 Hence I have vented my fury on them; I have put an end to them in the fire of my rage. I have made 
their conduct recoil on their own heads — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 23:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 23:2 “Son of man, there were once two women, daughters of the same mother. 

Eze 23:3 They played the whore in Egypt; they played the whore when they were still girls. There their nipples 
were handled, there their virgin breasts were first fondled. 

Eze 23:4 Their names were: Oholah the elder, Oholibah her sister. They belonged to me and bore sons and 
daughters. As regards their names, Samaria is Oholah, Jerusalem Oholibah. 

Eze 23:5 Now Oholah played the whore, although she belonged to me; she lusted after her lovers, her 
neighbours the Assyrians, 

Eze 23:6 dressed in purple, governors and magistrates, all of them young and desirable, and skilful horsemen. 
Eze 23:7 She played the whore with all of them, the pick of Assyria, and defiled herself with all the foul idols of 
all those with whom she was in love, 

Eze 23:8 nor did she give up the whoring begun in Egypt, where men had slept with her from her girlhood, 
fondling her virgin breasts, debauching her over and over again. 

Eze 23:9 “That is why I have handed her over to her lovers, to the Assyrians with whom she was in love. 

Eze 23:10 They stripped her naked, seized her sons and daughters and put her to the sword. She became 
notorious among women for the justice done on her. 

Eze 23:1 1 “Her sister Oholibah saw all this, but she was even more depraved, and her whorings were worse 
than her sister’s. 

Eze 23:12 She fell in love with her neighbours the Assyrians, governors and magistrates, dressed in sumptuous 
clothes, skilful horsemen, all young and desirable. 

Eze 23:13 Then I saw that she had defiled herself, that both sisters were equally bad. 

Eze 23:14 She began whoring worse than ever; no sooner had she seen wall-carvings of men, pictures of 
Chaldaeans coloured vermilion, 

Eze 23:15 men with sashes round their waists and elaborate turbans on their heads, all so lordly of bearing, 
depicting the Babylonians, natives of Chaldaea, 

Eze 23:16 than she fell in love with them at first sight and sent messengers to them in Chaldaea. 

Eze 23:17 The Babylonians came to her, shared her love-bed and defiled her with their whoring. Once defiled 
by them, she withdrew her affection from them. 

Eze 23:18 Thus she flaunted her whoring, exposing her body, until I withdrew my affection from her as I had 
withdrawn it from her sister. 

Eze 23:19 But she began whoring worse than ever, remembering her girlhood, when she had played the whore 
in Egypt, 

Eze 23:20 when she had been in love with their profligates, big-membered as donkeys, ejaculating as violently 
as stallions. 

Eze 23:21 “You were hankering for the debauchery of your girlhood, when they used to handle your nipples in 
Egypt and fondle your young breasts. 

Eze 23:22 And so, Oholibah, Lord Yahweh says this, ‘I shall set all your lovers against you, from whom you 
have withdrawn your affection, and bring them to assault you from all directions: 

Eze 23:23 the Babylonians and all the Chaldaeans, the men of Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians 
with them, young and desirable, all governors and magistrates, all famous lords and skilful horsemen. 

Eze 23:24 From the north, they will advance on you with chariots and wagons and an international army and 



beset you with shield, buckler and helmet on all sides. I shall charge them to pass sentence on you and they will 
pass sentence on you as they think fit. 

Eze 23:25 I shall direct my jealousy against you; they will treat you with fury; they will cut off your nose and ears, 
and what is left of your family will fall by the sword; they will seize your sons and daughters, and what is left will 
be burnt. 

Eze 23:26 They will strip off your garments and rob you of your jewels. 

Eze 23:27 I shall put an end to your debauchery and to the whorings you began in Egypt; you will not look to the 
Egyptians any more, you will never think of them again. 

Eze 23:28 For the Lord Yahweh says this: Now, I shall hand you over to those you hate, to those for whom you 
no longer feel affection. 

Eze 23:29 They will treat you with hatred, they will rob you of the entire fruit of your labours and leave you stark 
naked. And thus your shameful whorings will be exposed, your debauchery and your whorings. 

Eze 23:30 This will happen to you because you have played the whore with the nations and have defiled 
yourself with their foul idols. 

Eze 23:31 Since you have copied your sister’s behaviour, I shall put her cup in your hand’. 

Eze 23:32 The Lord Yahweh says this: You will drink your sister’s cup, a cup both deep and wide, leading to 
laughter and mockery, so ample the draught it holds. 

Eze 23:33 You will be filled with drunkenness and sorrow. Cup of affliction and devastation, the cup of your 
sister Samaria, 

Eze 23:34 you will drink it, you will drain it; then you will break it in pieces and lacerate your own breasts. For I 
have spoken — declared the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 23:35 ‘And so, the Lord Yahweh says this: Since you have forgotten me and have turned your back on me, 
you too will have to bear the weight of your debauchery and whorings’”. 

Eze 23:36 And Yahweh said to me, “Son of man, are you ready to judge Oholah and Oholibah and charge them 
with their loathsome practices? 

Eze 23:37 They have been adulteresses, their hands are dripping with blood, they have committed adultery with 
their foul idols. As for the children they had borne me, they have offered them as burnt sacrifices to feed them. 
Eze 23:38 And here is something else they have done to me: they have defiled my sanctuary today and have 
profaned my Sabbaths. 

Eze 23:39 The same day as sacrificing their children to their idols, they have been to my sanctuary and 
profaned it. Yes, this is what they have done in my own house. 

Eze 23:40 “Worse still, they summoned men from far away, invited by messenger, and they came. For them you 
bathed, you painted your eyes, put on your jewels 

Eze 23:41 and sat on a sumptuous bed, by which a table was laid out. On this you had put my incense and my 
oil. 

Eze 23:42 The noise of the carefree company resounded, made by the crowd of men brought in from the desert; 
they put bracelets on the women’s arms and magnificent crowns on their heads. 

Eze 23:43 I thought, ‘That woman, worn out with adultery! Are they going to fornicate with her too?’. 

Eze 23:44 Yet they visit her like any common prostitute, just as they visited those profligate women Oholah and 
Oholibah. 

Eze 23:45 All the same, there are upright men who will judge them as adulteresses and murderesses are 
judged, since they are adulteresses and their hands are dripping with blood’. 

Eze 23:46 “The Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Summon an assembly to deal with them, and hand them over to terror 
and pillage; 

Eze 23:47 let the assembly stone them and dispatch them with their swords; let their sons and daughters be 
slaughtered and their houses set on fire. 

Eze 23:48 This is how I shall purge the country of debauchery, so that all women will be taught the lesson never 
to ape your debauchery again. 

Eze 23:49 Your debauchery will recoil on yourselves, and you will bear the weight of the sins committed with 
your foul idols and you will know that I am the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 24:1 In the ninth year, on the tenth day of the tenth month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as 
follows, 

Eze 24:2 “Son of man, write down today’s date, yes, today’s, for this very day the king of Babylon began his 
attack on Jerusalem. 

Eze 24:3 So pronounce a parable for this tribe of rebels. Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Put the pot on the 
fire; put it on; pour the water in! 

Eze 24:4 Now put the cuts of meat all in together, all the best cuts, leg and shoulder. Fill it with the best bones. 
Eze 24:5 Take the best of the flock, then heap wood underneath; boil it thoroughly until even the bones are 
cooked. 



Eze 24:6 ‘For the Lord Yahweh says this: Disaster is in store for the bloody city, for that rusty cooking pot 
whose rust will not come off! Empty it, bit by bit, not bothering to draw lots; 

Eze 24:7 for she is still full of bloodshed, she has put blood on the naked rock; she did not pour it on the ground 
so as to cover it with dust. 

Eze 24:8 To make anger rise, to exact vengeance, I have put her blood on the naked rock, so that it should not 
be covered: 

Eze 24:9 ‘So, the Lord Yahweh says this: Disaster is in store for the bloody city! I too plan to build a great fire. 
Eze 24:10 Heap on the wood, light it, cook the meat, prepare the seasoning let the bones burn! 

Eze 24:1 1 Put the empty pot on the coals to make it hot, until the bronze glows, the filth inside melts and the 
rust is burnt away! 

Eze 24:12 ‘But all that rust would not come off in the fire. 

Eze 24: 1 3 Your filth is infamous. Since I have tried to purge you and you would not let yourself be purged of 
your filth, so now you will never be purged of your filth until I have sated my anger on you. 

Eze 24:14 I, Yahweh, have spoken; this will happen; I shall act and not relent; I shall show no pity, no 
compassion. You will be judged as your conduct and actions deserve — declares the Lord Yahweh’. 1 
Eze 24:15 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 24: 1 6 “Son of man, at a blow I am about to deprive you of the delight of your eyes. But you are not to 
lament, not to weep, not to let your tears run down. 

Eze 24:17 Groan in silence, do not go into mourning for the dead, knot your turban round your head, put your 
sandals on your feet, do not cover your beard, do not eat the usual food”. 

Eze 24:18 I told this to the people in the morning, and my wife died in the evening, and the next morning I did as 
I had been ordered. 

Eze 24:19 The people then said to me, “Will you not explain what meaning these actions have for us?”. 

Eze 24:20 I replied, “The word of Yahweh has been addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 24:21 ‘Say to the House of Israel, the Lord Yahweh says this: I am about to profane my sanctuary, the 
pride of your strength, the delight of your eyes, the joy of your hearts. Your sons and daughters whom you have 
left behind will fall by the sword. 

Eze 24:22 Then you will do as I have done: you will not cover your beards or eat the usual food; 

Eze 24:23 you will keep your turbans on your heads and your sandals on your feet; you will not lament or weep 
but will waste away for your crimes, groaning among yourselves. 

Eze 24:24 Thus Ezekiel is a sign for you. You will do exactly what he has done. And when this happens, you will 
know that I am Lord Yahweh!’. 

Eze 24:25 “And, son of man, the day that I deprive them of their strength, their crowning joy, the delight of their 
eyes, the joy of their hearts, their sons and daughters, 

Eze 24:26 that day a survivor will bring you the news. 

Eze 24:27 That day your mouth will be opened to speak to the survivor; you will speak and no longer be dumb; 
you will be a sign for them, and they will know that I am Yahweh”. 

Eze 25:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 25:2 “Son of man, turn towards the Ammonites and prophesy against them. 

Eze 25:3 Say to the Ammonites, ‘Hear the word of the Lord Yahweh. The Lord Yahweh says this: ‘Since you 
gloated over my sanctuary when it was profaned, and over the land of Israel when it was ravaged, and over the 
House of Judah when it went into exile, 

Eze 25:4 I shall let the sons of the East take possession of you; they will pitch their camps inside you, they will 
make their home in you. They will be the ones to eat your produce and drink your milk. 

Eze 25:5 I shall turn Rabbah into a camel yard and the towns of Ammon into sheepfolds. And so you will know 
that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 25:6 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Since you have clapped your hands and danced for joy, full of malicious 
delight at Israel’s fate, 

Eze 25:7 my hand will be against you for this; I shall hand you over to be looted by the peoples, obliterate you 
as a nation and wipe you out as a country. I shall reduce you to nothing, and you will know that I am Yahweh. 
Eze 25:8 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: ‘Since Moab and Seir have said: Look at the House of Judah; it is no 
different from any other nation; 

Eze 25:9 very well, I shall expose Moab’s heights; its cities will no longer be cities throughout the land — the 
jewels of the country, Beth-Jeshimoth, Baal-Meon and Kiriathaim. 

Eze 25:10 I shall let the sons of the East and the Ammonites take possession of them, so that they will no 
longer be remembered by the nations. 

Eze 25:1 1 I shall bring Moab to justice, and they will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 25:12 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: ‘Since Edom has taken revenge on the House of Judah and committed 
great crimes in doing so, 



Eze 25:13 very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: My hand will be against Edom and denude it of human and 
animal. I shall lay it waste, from Teman as far as Dedan they will be put to the sword. 

Eze 25:14 I shall take vengeance on Edom by means of my people Israel. They will treat Edom as my anger 
and fury dictate, and they will know this is my vengeance — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 25:15 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Since the Philistines have acted in revenge and, motivated by malice, 
have taken revenge, doing their best to destroy because of their long-standing hatred, 

Eze 25:16 very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: My hand will be against the Philistines; I shall exterminate the 
Cherethites and destroy the rest of the coastal peoples. 

Eze 25:17 I shall perform frightful acts of vengeance and inflict furious punishments on them; and they will know 
that I am Yahweh, when I exact my vengeance on them’”. 

Eze 26:1 In the eleventh year, on the first of the month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 
Eze 26:2 “Son of man, since Tyre has said of Jerusalem: ‘Aha! She is shattered, the Gateway to the Nations; 
she now gives way to me. Her riches are ruined!’. 

Eze 26:3 Very well, the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Now, Tyre, I am against you, 

Eze 26:4 I shall raise many nations against you as the sea raises its waves. They will destroy the walls of Tyre, 
they will demolish her towers; I shall sweep the dust of her away and reduce her to a naked rock. 

Eze 26:5 She will be a drying-ground out to sea for fishing-nets. For I have spoken- declares Lord Yahweh. She 
will be the prey of the nations. 

Eze 26:6 As for her daughters on the mainland, these will be put to the sword, and they will know that I am 
Yahweh’. 

Eze 26:7 “For the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘From the north, I shall bring Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, king 
of kings, down on Tyre with horses, chariots, cavalry and an enormous army. 

Eze 26:8 He will put your daughters on the mainland to the sword. He will build siege-works against you, cast up 
a siege-ramp against you, raise a screen against you; 

Eze 26:9 he will pound your walls with his battering-rams, and demolish your towers with his siege-engines. 

Eze 26:10 His horses are so many that their dust will hide you. The noise of his horsemen and his chariot- 
wheels will make your walls tremble as he enters your gates as though storming into a city through the breach. 
Eze 26:1 1 With his horses’ hoofs he will trample through all your streets; he will put your people to the sword, 
and throw your massive pillars to the ground. 

Eze 26:12 Your wealth will be seized, your merchandise looted, your walls rased, your luxurious houses 
shattered, your stones, your timbers, your very dust, thrown into the sea. 

Eze 26:13 I shall put an end to the sound of your songs; the sound of your harps will not be heard again. 

Eze 26:14 I shall reduce you to a naked rock, and make you into a drying-ground for fishing-nets, never to be 
rebuilt; for I, Yahweh, have spoken -declares the Lord Yahweh’. 

Eze 26:15 “The Lord Yahweh says this to Tyre, ‘Will not the islands quake at the sound of your fall, while the 
wounded groan and the slaughter takes place inside you? 

Eze 26:16 All the princes of the sea will leave their thrones, lay aside their cloaks, take off their embroidered 
robes. Dressed in terror they will sit on the ground trembling incessantly, stunned at your fate. 

Eze 26:17 ‘They will raise the lament for you as follows: You are destroyed then, vanished from the seas, 
famous city, former sea-power, who with her citizens, used to spread terror all over the mainland! 

Eze 26:18 Now the islands are trembling on the day of your fall; the islands of the sea are terrified by your end. 
Eze 26:19 ‘For the Lord Yahweh says this: ‘When I make you a ruined city like other deserted cities, when I 
raise the deep against you and the ocean covers you, 

Eze 26:20 when I fling you down with those who go down into the abyss, with the people of long ago, and put 
you deep in the underworld, in the ruins of long ago with those who sink into oblivion, so that you can never 
come back or be restored to the land of the living, 

Eze 26:21 I will make you an object of terror; you will not exist. People will look for you but never find you again 
— declares the Lord Yahweh!’”. 

Eze 27:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 27:2 “Son of man, raise the lament for Tyre. 

Eze 27:3 Say to Tyre, ‘City enthroned at the gateway of the sea, agent between the peoples and the many 
islands, Lord Yahweh says this: Tyre, you used to say: I am a ship perfect in beauty. 

Eze 27:4 Your frontiers were far out to sea; those who built you made you perfect in beauty. 

Eze 27:5 Cypress from Senir they used for all your planking. They took a cedar from Lebanon to make a mast 
above you. 

Eze 27:6 From oaks of Bashan they made your oars. They built you a deck of cedar inlaid with ivory from the 
Kittim isles. 

Eze 27:7 Embroidered linen from Egypt was used for your sail and for your flag. Purple and scarlet from the 
Elishah islands formed your deck-tent. 



Eze 27:8 The people of Sidon and Arvad were your oarsmen. The sages of Tyre were aboard, serving as 
sailors. 

Eze 27:9 The elders and craftsmen of Gebal were there to caulk your seams. ‘Every sea-going ship and crew 
frequented you to guarantee your trade. 

Eze 27:10 Men from Persia, Lud and Put served as warriors in your army; hanging up shield and helmet in you, 
they displayed your splendour. 

Eze 27:1 1 The sons of Arvad with their army manned your walls all round, while the Gammadians manned your 
towers; hanging their shields all round your walls, they completed your beauty. 

Eze 27:12 Tarshish traded with you because of your abundant resources and exchanged your merchandise for 
silver, iron, tin and lead. 

Eze 27:13 Javan, Tubal and Meshech traded with you. For your merchandise they traded slaves and bronze 
artefacts. 

Eze 27:14 The people of Beth-Togarmah traded your horses, chargers, mules. 

Eze 27:15 The people of Dedan traded with you; many islands were your customers and paid you in ivory tusks 
and ebony. 

Eze 27:16 Edom traded with you for the sake of your many manufactured goods, exchanging garnets, purple, 
embroideries, fine linen, coral and rubies for your goods. 

Eze 27:17 Judah and the land of Israel also traded with you, bringing corn from Minnith, pannag, honey, oil and 
balm. 

Eze 27:18 Damascus traded with you, for quantities of your manufactured goods and other goods of all kinds, 
furnishing you with wine from Helbon and wool from Zahar. 

Eze 27:19 Dan and Javan, from Uzal onwards, supplied you with wrought iron, cassia and reeds in exchange 
for your goods. 

Eze 27:20 Dedan traded with you in saddle-cloths. 

Eze 27:21 Arabia and all the sheikhs of Kedar were your customers; they paid in lambs, rams and he-goats. 

Eze 27:22 The merchants of Sheba and Raamah traded with you; they supplied you with the finest spices, 
precious stones and gold for your merchandise. 

Eze 27:23 Haran, Canneh and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur and Chilmad traded with you. 

Eze 27:24 They traded rich clothes, embroidered and purple cloaks, multi-coloured materials and strong plaited 
cords for your markets. 

Eze 27:25 Ships of Tarshish sailed on your business; you were full and heavily loaded far out to sea. 

Eze 27:26 Out to the open sea your oarsmen rowed you. The east wind has wrecked you far out to sea. 

Eze 27:27 Your riches, your goods, your cargo, your seamen, your sailors, your caulkers, your commercial 
agents, all the warriors you carry, and all the passengers who are aboard will founder far out to sea on the day of 
your shipwreck. 

Eze 27:28 When they hear the cries of your sailors the coasts will tremble. 

Eze 27:29 Then the oarsmen will all desert their ships. The sailors and seafaring people will stay ashore. 

Eze 27:30 They will raise their voices for you and weep bitterly. They will throw dust on their heads and roll in 
ashes; 

Eze 27:31 they will shave their heads for you and put sackcloth round their waists. With heartfelt bitterness they 
will weep for you, bitterly wail. 

Eze 27:32 Wailing, they will raise the lament for you, they will lament over you: Who is like Tyre, far out to sea? 
Eze 27:33 When you unloaded your goods to satisfy so many peoples, you enriched the kings of the earth with 
your excess of wealth and goods. 

Eze 27:34 Now you have been wrecked by the waves, by the depths of the sea. Your cargo and all your 
passengers have foundered with you. 

Eze 27:35 All those who live in the islands will be stunned at your fate. Their kings will quake with horror, with 
downcast expressions. 

Eze 27:36 The merchants of the nations will whistle at your fate. You will be an object of terror, gone for ever’”. 
Eze 28:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 28:2 “Son of man, say to the ruler of Tyre, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Because your heart has grown 
proud, you thought: I am a god; I am divinely enthroned far out to sea. Though you are human, not divine, you 
have allowed yourself to think like God. 

Eze 28:3 So, you are wiser than Danel; no sage as wise as you! 

Eze 28:4 By your wisdom and your intelligence you have made yourself a fortune, you have put gold and silver 
into your treasuries. 

Eze 28:5 Such is your skill in trading, your fortune has continued to increase, and your fortune has made your 
heart grow prouder. 

Eze 28:6 ‘And so, the Lord Yahweh says this: Since you have allowed yourself to think like God, 



Eze 28:7 very well, I am going to bring foreigners against you, the most barbarous of the nations. They will draw 
sword against your fine wisdom, they will desecrate your splendour, 

Eze 28:8 they will throw you down into the grave and you will die a violent death far out to sea. 

Eze 28:9 Will you still think: I am a god, when your slaughterers confront you? But you will be human, not divine, 
in the clutches of the ones who strike you down! 

Eze 28:10 You will die like the uncircumcised at the hand of foreigners. ‘For I have spoken — declares the Lord 
Yahweh’”. 

Eze 28:1 1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 28:12 “Son of man, raise a lament for the king of Tyre. Say to him, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: You used 
to be a model of perfection, full of wisdom, perfect in beauty; 

Eze 28:13 you were in Eden, in the garden of God. All kinds of gem formed your mantle: sard, topaz, diamond, 
chrysolite, onyx, jasper, sapphire, garnet, emerald, and your ear-pendants and spangles were made of gold; all 
was ready on the day you were created. 

Eze 28:14 I made you a living creature with outstretched wings, as guardian, you were on the holy mountain of 
God; you walked amid red-hot coals. 

Eze 28:15 Your behaviour was exemplary from the day you were created until guilt first appeared in you, 

Eze 28:16 because your busy trading has filled you with violence and sin. I have thrown you down from the 
mountain of God and destroyed you, guardian winged creature, amid the coals. 

Eze 28:17 Your heart has grown proud because of your beauty, your wisdom has been corrupted by your 
splendour. I have thrown you to the ground; I have made you a spectacle for kings. 

Eze 28:18 By the immense number of your crimes, by the dishonesty of your trading, you have defiled your 
sanctuary. So I have brought fire out of you to devour you; I have reduced you to ashes on the ground before the 
eyes of all who saw you. 

Eze 28:19 Of the nations, all who know you are stunned at your fate. You are an object of terror; gone for ever’. 

i 

Eze 28:20 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 28:21 “Son of man, turn towards Sidon and prophesy against her. 

Eze 28:22 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I am against you, Sidon, I will show my glory in you! They will 
know I am Yahweh, once I execute sentence on her and display my holiness in her. 

Eze 28:23 For I shall send her the plague, and there will be blood in her streets, and in her the dead will fall 
under the sword raised against her from all sides, and they will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 28:24 ‘No more, for the House of Israel, shall any of the hostile nations surrounding them be a thorn that 
wounds or a briar that tears; and they will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 28:25 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: When I gather the House of Israel back from the peoples where they 
are dispersed, I shall display my glory in them for the nations to see. They will live on the soil which I gave to my 
servant Jacob. 

Eze 28:26 They will live there in confidence, build houses, plant vineyards. They will live in safety, once I inflict 
punishments on all the hostile nations surrounding them, and they will know that I am Yahweh their God’”. 

Eze 29:1 In the tenth year, on the twelfth day of the tenth month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as 
follows, 

Eze 29:2 “Son of man, turn towards Pharaoh king of Egypt and prophesy against him and against the whole of 
Egypt. 

Eze 29:3 Speak and say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Look, I am against you, Pharaoh king of Egypt- the great 
crocodile wallowing in his Niles who thought: My Nile is mine, I made it. 

Eze 29:4 I shall put hooks through your jaws, make your Nile fish stick to your scales, and pull you out of your 
Niles with all your Nile fish sticking to your scales. 

Eze 29:5 I shall drop you in the desert, with all your Nile fish. You will fall in the wilds and not be taken up or 
buried. I shall give you as food to the wild animals and the birds of heaven, 

Eze 29:6 and all the inhabitants of Egypt will know that I am Yahweh, for they have given no more support than 
a reed to the House of Israel. 

Eze 29:7 Wherever they grasped you, you broke in their hands and cut their hands all over. Whenever they 
leaned on you, you broke, making all their limbs give way. 

Eze 29:8 ‘So, the Lord Yahweh says this: I shall send the sword against you to denude you of human and 
animal. 

Eze 29:9 Egypt will become a desolate waste, and they will know that I am Yahweh. Because he thought: The 
Nile is mine, I made it, 

Eze 29:10 very well, I am against you and your Niles. I shall make Egypt a waste and a desolation, from Migdol 
to Syene and beyond to the frontiers of Ethiopia. 

Eze 29:1 1 No human foot will pass through it, no animal foot will pass through it. For forty years it will remain 



uninhabited. 

Eze 29:12 I shall make Egypt the most desolate of countries; for forty years its cities will be the most desolate of 
wasted cities. And I shall scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the countries. 

Eze 29:13 The Lord Yahweh, however, says this: After forty years have passed, I shall gather the Egyptians 
back from the nations where they were dispersed. 

Eze 29:14 I shall bring the Egyptian captives back and re-install them in the land of Pathros, in the country of 
their origin. There they will constitute a modest kingdom. 

Eze 29:15 Egypt will be the most modest of kingdoms and no longer dominate other nations; for I shall reduce it, 
so that it will not rule other nations ever again. 

Eze 29:16 It will no longer be anything for the House of Israel to trust in, but will be a reminder of the guilt which 
lay in turning to it for help. And they will know that I am Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 29:17 In the twenty-seventh year, on the first day of the first month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to 
me as follows: 

Eze 29:18 “Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has taken his army in a great expedition against Tyre. 
Their heads have all gone bald, their shoulders are all chafed, but even so he has derived no profit, either for 
himself or for his army, from the expedition mounted against Tyre. 

Eze 29:19 Since this is so, the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Look, I shall hand Egypt over to Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon. He will carry off its riches, loot it, put it to the sack; that will be the wages for his army. 

Eze 29:20 As wages for the trouble he has taken, I am giving him Egypt instead (for they have been working for 
me)-declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 29:21 ‘That day, I shall raise up a new stock for the House of Israel and allow you to open your mouth 
among them. And they will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 30:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 30:2 “Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Howl: Disaster day! 

Eze 30:3 For the day is near, the day of Yahweh is near; it will be a day dark with cloud, a time of doom for the 
nations. 

Eze 30:4 ‘The sword will come on Egypt, and anguish on the country of Cush when the slaughtered fall in 
Egypt, when her riches are carried away and her foundations are destroyed. 

Eze 30:5 Cush, Put and Lud, all Arabia, Cub and the children of the country of the covenant will fall by the 
sword with them. 

Eze 30:6 ‘Yahweh says this: ‘The supports of Egypt will fall; the pride of her strength will crumble; they will fall 
by the sword from Migdol to Syene — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 30:7 ‘They will be the most desolate of desolate countries, and its cities the most ruined of cities. 

Eze 30:8 And they will know that I am Yahweh when I set fire to Egypt and all its supports are shattered. 

Eze 30:9 ‘That day, I shall send messengers by ship to terrify the carefree Cushites, and anguish will overtake 
them on the day of Egypt — it is coming now! 

Eze 30:10 The Lord Yahweh says this: I shall destroy the huge population of Egypt at the hand of 
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. 

Eze 30:1 1 He and his people, the most barbarous of nations, will be brought to ravage the country. They will 
draw the sword against Egypt and fill the country with corpses. 

Eze 30:12 I shall dry up the courses of the Nile and sell the country to the wicked. I shall lay the whole country 
waste and everything in it, at the hand of foreigners. I, Yahweh, have spoken. 

Eze 30:13 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I shall destroy the foul idols and take the false gods away from Noph. 
Egypt will be left without a ruler. I shall spread fear through Egypt. 

Eze 30:14 I shall lay Pathros waste, set Zoan on fire, inflict my punishments on No. 

Eze 30:15 I shall vent my fury on Sin, the bastion of Egypt; I shall wipe out the throngs of No. 

Eze 30:16 I shall set fire to Egypt; Sin will be seized with convulsions; a breach will be opened at No and the 
waters flood out. 

Eze 30:17 The young men of On and Pi-Beseth will fall by the sword and the cities themselves go into captivity. 
Eze 30:18 At Tahpanhes day will turn to darkness when I shatter the sceptres of Egypt there, when the pride of 
her strength ceases. A cloud will cover Egypt itself, and its daughters will go into captivity. 

Eze 30:19 Such will be the punishments I inflict on Egypt. And they will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 30:20 In the eleventh year, on the seventh day of the first month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to me 
as follows, 

Eze 30:21 “Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; you can see that no one has dressed 
his wound by applying remedies to it, by bandaging it and by dressing it, to make it strong enough to wield the 
sword. 

Eze 30:22 This being so, the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Look, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt; I shall break 
his arms, the sound one and the broken one, and make the sword drop from his hand. 



Eze 30:23 I shall scatter Egypt among the nations and disperse it among the countries. 

Eze 30:24 I shall strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon and put my sword in his hand. I shall break 
Pharaoh’s arms and, confronted with his enemy, he will groan like a dying man. 

Eze 30:25 I shall strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh will fall. And they will 
know that I am Yahweh, when I put my sword into the hands of the king of Babylon and he wields it against 
Egypt. 

Eze 30:26 I shall scatter Egypt among the nations and disperse it among the countries; and they will know that I 
am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 31:1 In the eleventh year, on the first day of the third month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as 
follows, 

Eze 31 :2 “Son of man, say to Pharaoh king of Egypt and his throng of subjects: ‘What can compare with you for 
greatness? 

Eze 31 :3 I know: a cedar tree in the Lebanon with noble branches, dense foliage, lofty height. Its top pierces the 
clouds. 

Eze 31 :4 The waters have made it grow, the deep has made it tall, pouring its rivers round the place where it is 
planted, sending rivulets to all the wild trees. 

Eze 31 :5 This is why its height was greater than that of other wild trees, its branches increased in number, its 
boughs stretched wide, because of the plentiful waters making it grow. 

Eze 31 :6 All the birds of heaven nested in its branches; under its boughs all wild animals dropped their young; in 
its shade sat many, many people. 

Eze 31:7 It was beautiful in its size, in the span of its boughs; for its roots were in plentiful waters. 

Eze 31 :8 There was no cedar like it in the garden of God, no cypress had branches such as these, no plane tree 
could match its boughs, no tree in the garden of God could rival its beauty. 

Eze 31 :9 I had made it so lovely with its many branches that it was the envy of every tree in Eden, in the garden 
of God. 

Eze 31:10 ‘Very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: ‘Since it has raised itself to its full height, has lifted its top into 
the clouds, and has grown arrogant about its height, 

Eze 31:11 I have handed it over to the prince of the nations, for him to treat as its wickedness deserves; I have 
rejected it. 

Eze 31:12 Foreigners, the most barbarous of nations, have cut it down and deserted it. On the mountains, in all 
the valleys, lie its branches; its broken boughs are in every ravine throughout the country; everybody in the 
country has fled its shade and deserted it. 

Eze 31:13 On its wreckage perch all the birds of heaven; all the wild animals have advanced on its branches. 
Eze 31:14 ‘So in future let no tree rear its height beside the waters, none push its top into the clouds, no 
watered tree stretch its height towards them. For all of them are doomed to death, to the depths of the 
underworld, with the common run of humanity, with those who sink into oblivion. 

Eze 31:15 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: The day it went down to Sheol, I imposed mourning, I closed the deep 
over it. I stopped its rivers and the plentiful waters dried up; I made Lebanon dark because of it, and all the wild 
trees wilted because of it. 

Eze 31:16 With the noise when it fell I made the nations quake, as I hurled it down to Sheol, with those who sink 
into oblivion. In the depths of the underworld all the trees of Eden took comfort, the pick of the loveliest trees of 
the Lebanon, all irrigated by the waters. 

Eze 31:17 And its offspring among the nations, once living in its shade, went down to Sheol with it, to those who 
have been slaughtered by the sword. 

Eze 31:18 ‘Which of the trees of Eden compares with you for glory and greatness? Yet you have been hurled 
down with the trees of Eden, to the depths of the underworld, among the uncircumcised, and there you lie with 
those who have been slaughtered by the sword. So much for Pharaoh and all his throng — declares the Lord 
Yahweh’”. 

Eze 32:1 In the twelfth year, on the first day of the twelfth month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as 
follows, 

Eze 32:2 “Son of man, raise a lament for Pharaoh king of Egypt. Say to him: ‘Young lion of nations, you are 
destroyed! Once you were like a crocodile in the lagoons; emerging from your rivers, you churned up the water 
with your trampling and fouled their streams. 

Eze 32:3 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I shall throw my net over you in a great concourse of nations; and they 
will trawl you up in my net. Then I shall leave you high and dry, 

Eze 32:4 I shall throw you out into the wilds and make all the birds of heaven settle on you, and glut all the 
beasts of the earth with you. 

Eze 32:5 I shall strew your flesh on your mountains and fill the valleys with your corruption; 

Eze 32:6 I shall water the country with what flows from you, with your blood, on the mountainsides, and you will 



fill the ravines. 

Eze 32:7 When I extinguish you I shall cover the skies and darken the stars. I shall cover the sun with clouds 
and the moon will not give its light. 

Eze 32:8 I shall dim every luminary in heaven because of you and cover your country in darkness -declares the 
Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 32:9 ‘I shall grieve the heart of many peoples when I bring about your destruction among the nations, in 
countries unknown to you. 

Eze 32:10 I shall stun many peoples with shock at your fate; their kings will tremble with horror at your fate, 
when I brandish my sword before their eyes. The day you fall, each will tremble in terror for his life. 

Eze 32:1 1 For the Lord Yahweh says this: The sword of the king of Babylon will overtake you. 

Eze 32:12 I shall make your throngs of subjects fall at the swords of my warriors. They are the most barbarous 
of nations. They will annihilate the pride of Egypt, and all its throngs will be destroyed. 

Eze 32:13 I shall also destroy all its cattle beside the plentiful waters. No human foot will churn them, no animal 
foot will churn them up again; 

Eze 32:14 then I shall let their waters settle and make their rivers glide like oil — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 32:15 ‘When I reduce Egypt to a ruin and the country is stripped of its contents, when I strike all those who 
live there, they will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 32:16 ‘Such is the lament which the daughters of the nations will raise. They will raise it over Egypt and all 
its throng. This is the lament they will raise — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 32:17 In the twelfth year, on the fifteenth day of the first month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to me 
as follows, 

Eze 32:18 “Son of man, lament over the throng of Egypt, for down she must go with the daughters of majestic 
nations to the depths of the underworld with those who sink into oblivion. 

Eze 32:19 “Whom do you surpass in beauty? Down with you, make your bed with the uncircumcised, 

Eze 32:20 with those who have been slaughtered by the sword. (The sword has been given, it has been drawn.) 
She and all her throngs have fallen. 

Eze 32:21 From the depths of Sheol, the mightiest heroes, her allies, will say to her, ‘They have come down, 
they have lain down, uncircumcised, slaughtered by the sword’. 

Eze 32:22 “Assyria is there and all her hordes, with their graves all round her; all of them slaughtered, fallen by 
the sword; 

Eze 32:23 their graves have been made in the deepest part of the abyss, and her hordes, with their graves all 
round her; all of them slaughtered, killed by the sword, who once spread terror through the world of the living. 

Eze 32:24 “Elam is there and all her throng round her grave, all of them slaughtered, fallen by the sword; they 
have gone down uncircumcised to the depths of the underworld, who once spread terror throughout the world of 
the living. They have borne their shame with those who sink into oblivion. 

Eze 32:25 Among the slaughtered, they have put a bed for her, among her throng with their tombs round her, all 
of them uncircumcised, slaughtered by the sword for having spread terror throughout the world of the living. 

They have borne their shame with those who sink into oblivion. They have been put among the slaughtered. 

Eze 32:26 “Meshech, Tubal are there and all her throng, with their graves round her, all of them uncircumcised, 
slaughtered by the sword for having spread terror through the world of the living. 

Eze 32:27 They do not lie with the heroes who fell long ago, those who went down to Sheol fully armed, who 
had their swords laid under their heads and their shields put under their bones, since the heroes inspired the 
world of the living with terror. 

Eze 32:28 But you will be broken with the uncircumcised and lie with those slaughtered by the sword. 

Eze 32:29 “Edom is there, her kings and all her princes who, despite their valour, have been laid with those 
slaughtered by the sword. They lie with the uncircumcised, with those who sink into oblivion. 

Eze 32:30 “All the princes of the north and all the Sidonians are there, who have gone down with the 
slaughtered, because of the terror which their power inspired. Ashamed, uncircumcised, they lie among those 
slaughtered by the sword and bear their shame with those who sink into oblivion. 

Eze 32:31 “Pharaoh will see them and take comfort at the sight of all this throng slaughtered by the sword — 
Pharaoh and all his throng — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 32:32 For having spread terror through the world of the living, he will be laid with the uncircumcised, with 
those slaughtered by the sword, Pharaoh and all his throng — declares the Lord Yahweh”. 

Eze 33:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 33:2 “Son of man, speak to the people of your country. Say to them, ‘When I send the sword against the 
people of that country, take one of their number and post him as a watchman; 

Eze 33:3 if he sees the sword coming against the country, he must sound his horn to warn the people. 

Eze 33:4 If someöne hears the sound of the horn but pays no attention and the sword overtakes him and 
destroys him, he will have been responsible for his own death. 



Eze 33:5 He has heard the sound of the horn and paid no attention; his death will be his own responsibility. But 
the life of someöne who pays attention will be secure. 

Eze 33:6 ‘If, however, the watchman has seen the sword coming but has not blown his horn, and so the people 
are not alerted and the sword overtakes them and destroys a single one of them, that person will indeed die for 
his guilt, but I shall hold the watchman responsible for his death’. 

Eze 33:7 “Son of man I have appointed you as watchman for the House of Israel. When you hear a word from 
my mouth, warn them from me. 

Eze 33:8 If I say to someöne wicked, ‘Evil- doer, you are to die’, and you do not speak to warn the wicked 
person to renounce such ways, the wicked person will die for this guilt, but I shall hold you responsible for the 
death. 

Eze 33:9 If, however, you do warn someöne wicked to renounce such ways and repent, and that person does 
not repent, then the culprit will die for this guilt, but you yourself will have saved your life. 

Eze 33:10 “Son of man, say to the House of Israel, ‘You are continually saying: Our crimes and sins weigh 
heavily on us; we are wasting away because of them. How are we to go on living?’. 

Eze 33:1 1 Say to them, ‘As I live — declares the Lord Yahweh - I do not take pleasure in the death of the 
wicked but in the conversion of the wicked who changes his ways and saves his life. Repent, turn back from your 
evil ways. Why die, House of Israel?’. 

Eze 33:12 “Son of man, say to the members of your nation, ‘The uprightness of an upright person will not save 
him once he takes to wrong-doing; the wickedness of a wicked person will not ruin him once he renounces his 
wickedness. No one upright will be able to live on the strength of uprightness, having once taken to sinning. 

Eze 33:13 If I say to someöne upright: You are to live, and then, trusting in this uprightness, he does wrong, 
none of the uprightness will be remembered; because of the wrong-doing, he will die. 

Eze 33:14 If, however, I say to someöne wicked: You are to die, and he turns back from sin and does what is 
lawful and upright, 

Eze 33:15 if he returns pledges, restores what he has stolen, keeps the laws that give life and no longer does 
wrong, he will live and will not die. 

Eze 33:16 None of his previous sins will be remembered against him; having done what is lawful and upright, he 
will live. 

Eze 33:17 ‘But the members of your nation say: What the Lord does is unjust. But it is what you do that is 
unjust. 

Eze 33:18 When an upright person gives up being upright and does wrong, he dies for it. 

Eze 33:19 And when a wicked person gives up being wicked and does what is lawful and upright, because of 
this he lives. 

Eze 33:20 But you say: What the Lord does is unjust! I shall judge each of you by what you do, House of Israel’. 

i 

Eze 33:21 In the twelfth year of our captivity, on the fifth day of the tenth month, a fugitive arrived from 
Jerusalem and said to me, “The city has been taken”. 

Eze 33:22 Now the hand of the Lord had been on me the evening before the fugitive arrived; he had opened my 
mouth before the fugitive came to me the next morning; my mouth had been opened and I was dumb no longer. 
Eze 33:23 The word of Yahweh was then addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 33:24 “Son of man, the people living in those ruins on the soil of Israel say this, ‘Abraham was alone when 
he was given possession of this country. But we are many; the country has been given us as our heritage’. 

Eze 33:25 “Very well, tell them, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: You eat blood, you raise your eyes to your foul 
idols, you shed blood; are you to own the country? 

Eze 33:26 You rely on your swords, you engage in loathsome practices, each of you defiles his neighbour’s 
wife; are you to own the country?’. 

Eze 33:27 Tell them this, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: As I live, I swear it, those in the ruins will fall to the 
sword, those in the countryside I shall give to the wild animals for them to eat, and those among the crags and in 
caves will die of plague. 

Eze 33:28 I shall make the country a desolate waste, and the pride of its strength will be at an end. The 
mountains of Israel will be deserted and no one will pass that way again. 

Eze 33:29 Then they will know that I am Yahweh, when I make the country a desolate waste because of all the 
filthy things they have done’. 

Eze 33:30 “Son of man, the members of your nation are talking about you on the ramparts and in doorways. 

They keep saying to one another, ‘Come and hear the word that has come from Yahweh’. 

Eze 33:31 They throng towards you; my people sit down in front of you and listen to your words, but they do not 
act on them. What they act on is the lie in their mouths, and their hearts are set on dishonest gain. 

Eze 33:32 As far as they are concerned, you are like a love song pleasantly sung to a good musical 
accompaniment. They listen to your words, but no one acts on them. 



Eze 33:33 When the thing takes place — and it is beginning now — they will know that there has been a prophet 
among them”. 

Eze 34:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 34:2 “Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel; prophesy and say to them, ‘Shepherds, the 
Lord Yahweh says this: Disaster is in store for the shepherds of Israel who feed themselves! Are not shepherds 
meant to feed a flock? 

Eze 34:3 Yet you have fed on milk, you have dressed yourselves in wool, you have sacrificed the fattest sheep, 
but failed to feed the flock. 

Eze 34:4 You have failed to make weak sheep strong, or to care for the sick ones, or bandage the injured ones. 
You have failed to bring back strays or look for the lost. On the contrary, you have ruled them cruelly and 
harshly. 

Eze 34:5 For lack of a shepherd they have been scattered, to become the prey of all the wild animals; they have 
been scattered. 

Eze 34:6 My flock is astray on every mountain and on every high hill; my flock has been scattered all over the 
world; no one bothers about them and no one looks for them. 

Eze 34:7 ‘Very well, shepherds, hear the word of Yahweh: 

Eze 34:8 As I live, I swear it — declares the Lord Yahweh — since my flock has been pillaged and for lack of a 
shepherd is now the prey of every wild animal, since my shepherds have ceased to bother about my flock, since 
my shepherds feed themselves rather than my flock, 

Eze 34:9 very well, shepherds, hear the word of Yahweh: 

Eze 34: 1 0 The Lord Yahweh says this: Look, I am against the shepherds. I shall take my flock out of their 
charge and henceforth not allow them to feed my flock. And the shepherds will stop feeding themselves, 
because I shall rescue my sheep from their mouths to stop them from being food for them. 

Eze 34: 1 1 ‘For the Lord Yahweh says this: Look, I myself shall take care of my flock and look after it. 

Eze 34:12 As a shepherd looks after his flock when he is with his scattered sheep, so shall I look after my 
sheep. I shall rescue them from wherever they have been scattered on the day of clouds and darkness. 

Eze 34:13 I shall bring them back from the peoples where they are; I shall gather them back from the countries 
and bring them back to their own land. I shall pasture them on the mountains of Israel, in the ravines and in all 
the inhabited parts of the country. 

Eze 34:14 I shall feed them in good pasturage; the highest mountains of Israel will be their grazing ground. 
There they will rest in good grazing grounds; they will browse in rich pastures on the mountains of Israel. 

Eze 34:15 I myself shall pasture my sheep, I myself shall give them rest — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 34:16 I shall look for the lost one, bring back the stray, bandage the injured and make the sick strong. I 
shall watch over the fat and healthy. I shall be a true shepherd to them. 

Eze 34:17 ‘As for you, my sheep, the Lord Yahweh says this: I shall judge between sheep and sheep, between 
rams and he-goats. 

Eze 34:18 Not content to drink the clearest of the water, you foul the rest with your feet. 

Eze 34:19 And my sheep must graze on what your feet have trampled and drink what your feet have fouled. 

Eze 34:20 Very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: I myself shall judge between the fat sheep and the thin sheep. 
Eze 34:21 Since you have jostled with flank and shoulder and butted all the ailing sheep with your horns, until 
you have scattered them outside, 

Eze 34:22 I shall come and save my sheep and stop them from being victimised. I shall judge between sheep 
and sheep. 

Eze 34:23 ‘I shall raise up one shepherd, my servant David, and put him in charge of them to pasture them; he 
will pasture them and be their shepherd. 

Eze 34:24 I, Yahweh, shall be their God, and my servant David will be ruler among them. I, Yahweh, have 
spoken. 

Eze 34:25 I shall make a covenant of peace with them; I shall rid the country of wild animals. They will be able 
to live secure in the desert and go to sleep in the woods. 

Eze 34:26 I shall settle them round my hill; I shall send rain at the proper time; it will be a rain of blessings. 

Eze 34:27 The trees of the countryside will yield their fruit and the soil will yield its produce; they will be secure 
on their soil. And they will know that I am Yahweh when I break the bars of their yoke and rescue them from the 
clutches of their slave-masters. 

Eze 34:28 No more will they be a prey to the nations, no more will the wild animals of the country devour them. 
They will live secure, with no one to frighten them. 

Eze 34:29 I shall make splendid vegetation grow for them; no more will they suffer from famine in the country; 
no more will they have to bear the insults of other nations. 

Eze 34:30 So they will know that I, their God, am with them and that they, the House of Israel, are my people — 
declares the Lord Yahweh. 



Eze 34:31 And you, my sheep, are the flock of my human pasture, and I am your God — declares the Lord 
Yahweh’”. 

Eze 35:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 35:2 “Son of man, turn towards Mount Seir and prophesy against it. 

Eze 35:3 Say to it, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Look, I am against you, Mount Seir; I shall stretch out my hand 
against you; I shall make you a desolate waste; 

Eze 35:4 I shall lay your towns in ruins. You will become a waste and you will know that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 35:5 Since, following a long-standing hatred, you betrayed the Israelites to the sword on the day of their 
distress, on the day when an end came for their guilt, 

Eze 35:6 very well, as I live - declares the Lord Yahweh — 1 destine you to bloodshed, and bloodshed will 
pursue you. I swear it; you have incurred guilt by shedding blood, and bloodshed will pursue you. 

Eze 35:7 I shall make Mount Seir a desolate waste and denude it of anyone travelling to and fro. 

Eze 35:8 I shall fill its mountains with its slaughtered; on your hills, in your valleys and in all your ravines, those 
slaughtered by the sword will fall. 

Eze 35:9 I shall make you a perpetual waste, your towns will never be inhabited again, and you will know that I 
am Yahweh. 

Eze 35:10 ‘Since you said: The two nations and the two countries will be mine; we are going to take possession 
of it, although Yahweh was there, 

Eze 35:1 1 very well, as I live — declares the Lord Yahweh — 1 shall act with the same anger and jealousy as you 
acted in your hatred for them. I shall make myself known for their sake, when I punish you, 

Eze 35:12 and you will know that I, Yahweh, have heard all the blasphemies which you have uttered against the 
mountains of Israel, such as: They have been laid waste, they have been given to us for us to devour. 

Eze 35:13 Great was your insolence towards me, many your speeches against me; I have heard! 

Eze 35:14 Lord Yahweh says this: To the joy of the whole world, I shall make you a waste. 

Eze 35:15 Since you rejoiced because the heritage of the House of Israel had been laid waste, I shall do the 
same to you, Mount Seir; and you will become a waste, and so will the whole of Edom; and they will know that I 
am Yahweh”. ‘ 

Eze 36:1 “Son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel. Say, ‘Mountains of Israel, hear the word of Yahweh. 
Eze 36:2 The Lord Yahweh says this: Since the enemy has gloated over you by saying: Aha! These eternal 
heights are owned by us now, 

Eze 36:3 very well, prophesy! Say: The Lord Yahweh says this: Since you have been ravaged and seized on 
from all sides, and have become the property of the rest of the nations, and become the subject of people’s talk 
and gossip, 

Eze 36:4 very well, mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord Yahweh! The Lord Yahweh says this to the 
mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys, to the devastated ruins and abandoned cities which have been 
put to the sack and have become a laughing-stock to the rest of the nations all round; 

Eze 36:5 very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: I swear it in the heat of my jealousy; I am speaking to the rest of 
the nations and to the whole of Edom who so exultantly and contemptuously took possession of my country to 
despoil its pastureland’. 

Eze 36:6 “Because of this, prophesy about the land of Israel. Say to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and 
valleys, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I am speaking in my jealousy and rage; because you are enduring the 
insults of the nations, 

Eze 36:7 very well, the Lord Yahweh says this: I raise my hand and I swear that the nations all around you shall 
have their own insults to bear. 

Eze 36:8 ‘Mountains of Israel, you will grow branches and bear fruit for my people Israel, who will soon return. 
Eze 36:9 Yes, I am coming to you, I shall turn to you; you will be tilled and sown. 

Eze 36:10 I shall increase your population, the whole House of Israel, yes, all. The cities will be inhabited and 
the ruins rebuilt. 

Eze 36:1 1 I shall increase your population, both human and animal; they will be fertile and reproduce. I shall 
repopulate you as you were before; I shall make you more prosperous than you were before, and you will know 
that I am Yahweh. 

Eze 36:12 Thanks to me, men will tread your soil again, my people Israel; they will own you and you will be their 
heritage, and never again will you rob them of their children. 

Eze 36:13 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Since people have said of you: You are a man-eater, you have robbed 
your nation of its children, 

Eze 36:14 very well, you will eat no more men, never rob your nation of its children again — declares the Lord 
Yahweh. 

Eze 36:15 I shall never again let you hear the insults of the nations, you will never again have to bear the taunts 
of the peoples, you will never again rob the nation of its children — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 



Eze 36:16 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 36:17 “Son of man, the members of the House of Israel used to live in their own territory, but they defiled it 
by their conduct and actions; to me their conduct was as unclean as a woman’s menstruation. 

Eze 36:18 I then vented my fury on them because of the blood they shed in the country and the foul idols with 
which they defiled it. 

Eze 36:19 I scattered them among the nations and they were dispersed throughout the countries. I sentenced 
them as their conduct and actions deserved. 

Eze 36:20 They have profaned my holy name among the nations where they have gone, so that people say of 
them, ‘These are the people of Yahweh; they have been exiled from his land’. 

Eze 36:21 But I have been concerned about my holy name, which the House of Israel has profaned among the 
nations where they have gone. 

Eze 36:22 And so, say to the House of Israel, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I am acting not for your sake, House 
of Israel, but for the sake of my holy name, which you have profaned among the nations where you have gone. 
Eze 36:23 I am going to display the holiness of my great name, which has been profaned among the nations, 
which you have profaned among them. And the nations will know that I am Yahweh — declares the Lord Yahweh 
— when in you I display my holiness before their eyes. 

Eze 36:24 For I shall take you from among the nations and gather you back from all the countries, and bring you 
home to your own country. 

Eze 36:25 I shall pour clean water over you and you will be cleansed; I shall cleanse you of all your filth and of 
all your foul idols. 

Eze 36:26 I shall give you a new heart, and put a new spirit in you; I shall remove the heart of stone from your 
bodies and give you a heart of flesh instead. 

Eze 36:27 I shall put my spirit in you, and make you keep my laws, and respect and practise my judgements. 
Eze 36:28 You will live in the country which I gave your ancestors. You will be my people and I shall be your 
God. 

Eze 36:29 I shall save you from everything that defiles you, I shall summon the wheat and make it plentiful and 
impose no more famines on you. 

Eze 36:30 I shall increase the yield of tree and field, so that you will never again bear the ignominy of famine 
among the nations. 

Eze 36:31 Then you will remember your evil conduct and actions. You will loathe yourselves for your guilt and 
your loathsome practices. 

Eze 36:32 I assure you that I am not doing this for your sake — declares the Lord Yahweh. Be ashamed and 
blush for your conduct, House of Israel. 

Eze 36:33 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: On the day I cleanse you from all your guilt, I shall repopulate the cities 
and cause the ruins to be rebuilt. 

Eze 36:34 Waste land, once desolate for every passer-by to see, will now be farmed again. 

Eze 36:35 And people will say: This land, so recently a waste, is now like a garden of Eden, and the ruined 
cities once abandoned and levelled to the ground are now strongholds with people living in them. 

Eze 36:36 And the nations left round you will know that I, Yahweh, have rebuilt what was levelled and replanted 
what was ruined. I, Yahweh, have spoken and shall do it. 

Eze 36:37 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: As a further mark of favour, I shall let myself be consulted by the House 
of Israel; I shall increase their numbers like a human flock, 

Eze 36:38 like a flock of sacrificial animals, like the flock in Jerusalem on her solemn feasts. So your ruined 
cities will be filled with human flocks, and they will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 37:1 The hand of Yahweh was on me; he carried me away by the spirit of Yahweh and set me down in the 
middle of the valley, a valley full of bones. 

Eze 37:2 He made me walk up and down and all around among them. There were vast quantities of these 
bones on the floor of the valley; and they were completely dry. 

Eze 37:3 He said to me, “Son of man, can these bones live?”. I said, “You know, Lord Yahweh”. 

Eze 37:4 He said, “Prophesy over these bones. Say, ‘Dry bones, hear the word of Yahweh. 

Eze 37:5 The Lord Yahweh says this to these bones: I am now going to make breath enter you, and you will 
live. 

Eze 37:6 I shall put sinews on you, I shall make flesh grow on you, I shall cover you with skin and give you 
breath, and you will live; and you will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 37:7 I prophesied as I had been ordered. While I was prophesying, there was a noise, a clattering sound; it 
was the bones coming together. 

Eze 37:8 And as I looked, they were covered with sinews; flesh was growing on them and skin was covering 
them, yet there was no breath in them. 

Eze 37:9 He said to me, “Prophesy to the breath; prophesy, son of man. Say to the breath, ‘The Lord Yahweh 



says this: Come from the four winds, breath; breathe on these dead, so that they come to life!’”. 

Eze 37:10 I prophesied as he had ordered me, and the breath entered them; they came to life and stood up on 
their feet, a great, an immense army. 

Eze 37:1 1 Then he said, “Son of man, these bones are the whole House of Israel. They keep saying, ‘Our 
bones are dry, our hope has gone; we are done for’. 

Eze 37:12 So, prophesy. Say to them, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I am now going to open your graves; I shall 
raise you from your graves, my people, and lead you back to the soil of Israel. 

Eze 37:13 And you will know that I am Yahweh, when I open your graves and raise you from your graves, my 
people, 

Eze 37:14 and put my spirit in you, and you revive, and I resettle you on your own soil. Then you will know that 
I, Yahweh, have spoken and done this — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 37:15 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 37:16 “Son of man, take a stick and write on it, ‘Judah and those Israelites loyal to him’. Take another stick 
and write on it, ‘Joseph (Ephraim’s wood) and all the House of Israel loyal to him’. 

Eze 37:17 “Join one to the other to make a single piece of wood, a single stick in your hand. 

Eze 37:18 And when the members of your nation say, ‘Will you not tell us what you mean?’. 

Eze 37:19 say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I am taking the stick of Joseph (now in Ephraim’s hand) and those 
tribes of Israel loyal to him and shall join them to the stick of Judah. I shall make one stick out of the two, a single 
stick in my hand’. 

Eze 37:20 “When the pieces of wood you have written on are in your hand in full sight of them, 

Eze 37:21 say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I shall take the Israelites from the nations where they have gone. I 
shall gather them to- gether from everywhere and bring them home to their own soil. 

Eze 37:22 I shall make them into one nation in the country, on the mountains of Israel, and one king is to be 
king of them all; they will no longer form two nations, nor be two separate kingdoms. 

Eze 37:23 They will no longer defile themselves with their foul idols, their horrors and any of their crimes. I shall 
save them from the acts of infidelity which they have committed and shall cleanse them; they will be my people 
and I shall be their God. 

Eze 37:24 My servant David will reign over them, one shepherd for all; they will follow my judgements, respect 
my laws and practise them. 

Eze 37:25 They will live in the country which I gave to my servant Jacob, the country in which your ancestors 
lived. They will live in it, they, their children, their children’s children, for ever. David my servant is to be their 
prince for ever. 

Eze 37:26 I shall make a covenant of peace with them, an eternal covenant with them. I shall resettle them and 
make them grow; I shall set my sanctuary among them for ever. 

Eze 37:27 I shall make my home above them; I shall be their God, and they will be my people. 

Eze 37:28 And the nations will know that I am Yahweh the sanctifier of Israel, when my sanctuary is with them 
for ever’”. 

Eze 38:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Eze 38:2 “Son of man, turn towards Gog, to the country of Magog, towards the paramount prince of Meshech 
and Tubal, and prophesy against him. 

Eze 38:3 Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: I am against you, Gog, paramount prince of Meshech and Tubal. 
Eze 38:4 I shall turn you about, I shall fix hooks in your jaws and bring you out with your entire army, horses and 
horsemen, all perfectly equipped, a huge array armed with shields and bucklers, and all wielding swords. 

Eze 38:5 Persia and Cush and Put are with them, all with buckler and helmet; 

Eze 38:6 Gomer and all its troops, Beth-Togarmah in the far north and all its troops, and many nations with you. 
Eze 38:7 Be ready, be well prepared, you and all your troops and the others rallying to you, and hold yourself at 
my service. 

Eze 38:8 ‘Many days will pass before you are given orders; in the final years you will march on this country, 
whose inhabitants will have been living in confidence, remote from other peoples, since they escaped the sword 
and were gathered in from various nations, here in the long-deserted mountains of Israel. 

Eze 38:9 Like a storm you will approach, you will advance and cover the country like a cloud, you, all your 
troops and many nations with you. 

Eze 38:10 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: That day, a thought will enter your mind and you will form a sinister 
plan. 

Eze 38:1 1 You will think: I shall attack this undefended country and march on this peaceful nation living secure, 
all living in towns without walls or bars or gates. 

Eze 38:12 You will come to plunder and loot and turn your might against the ruins they live in, against this 
people gathered back from the nations, these stock-breeders and traders who live at the Navel of the World. 

Eze 38:13 Sheba and Dedan, the merchants and all the magnates of Tarshish will ask you: Have you come for 



plunder? Are you massing your troops with a view to looting? To make off with gold and silver, seize cattle and 
goods, and come away with unlimited spoil?’. 

Eze 38:14 “So, son of man, prophesy. Say to Gog, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Is it not true that you will set out 
at a time when my people Israel is living secure? 

Eze 38:15 You will leave your home in the far north, you and many nations with you, a great army of countless 
troops all mounted. 

Eze 38:16 You will invade Israel, my people. You will be like a cloud covering the country. In the final days, I 
myself shall bring you to attack my country, so that the nations will know who I am, when I display my holiness to 
them, by means of you, Gog. 

Eze 38:17 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: It was of you that I spoke in the past through my servants the prophets 
of Israel, who prophesied in those days, foretelling your invasion. 

Eze 38:18 The day Gog attacks the land of Israel — declares the Lord Yahweh — my furious wrath will boil up. In 
my anger, 

Eze 38:19 in my jealousy, in the heat of my fury I say it: That day, I swear, there will be such a huge earthquake 
in the land of Israel, 

Eze 38:20 that the fish in the sea and the birds of heaven, the wild beasts, all the reptiles creeping along the 
ground, and all people on the surface of the earth will quake before me. Mountains will fall, cliffs crumble, all 
walls collapse, and 

Eze 38:21 I shall summon every kind of sword against him - declares the Lord Yahweh — and each will turn his 
sword against his comrade. 

Eze 38:22 I shall punish him with plague and bloodshed, and rain down torrential rain, hailstones, fire and 
brimstone on him, on his troops and on the many nations with him. 

Eze 38:23 I shall display my greatness and holiness and bring the many nations to acknowledge me; and they 
will know that I am Yahweh’”. 

Eze 39:1 “So, son of man, prophesy against Gog. Say, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Look, I am against you, 
Gog, paramount prince of Meshech and Tubal. 

Eze 39:2 I shall turn you about, lead you on, and bring you from the farthest north against the mountains of 
Israel. 

Eze 39:3 I shall break the bow in your left hand and dash the arrows out of your right. 

Eze 39:4 You will fall on the mountains of Israel, you, all your troops and the nations with you. I shall make you 
food for every kind of bird of prey and wild animals. 

Eze 39:5 You will fall in the wilds, for I have spoken — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 39:6 I shall send down fire on Magog and on those living undisturbed in the islands, and they will know that 
I am Yahweh. 

Eze 39:7 I shall see that my holy name is acknowledged by my people Israel, and no longer allow my holy name 
to be profaned; and the nations will know that I am Yahweh, holy in Israel. 

Eze 39:8 ‘All this is to happen, all this is to take place — declares the Lord Yahweh. This is the day I predicted. 
Eze 39:9 ‘The inhabitants of the towns of Israel will go out and set fire to and burn the weapons, the shields and 
bucklers, bows and arrows, javelins and spears. They will burn these for seven years 
Eze 39:10 and not fetch wood from the countryside or cut it in the forests, since they will be burning the 
weapons. They will plunder those who plundered them, and despoil those who despoiled them — declares the 
Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 39:1 1 ‘That day, I shall give Gog a famous spot in Israel for his grave, the valley of the Obarim, east of the 
Sea — the valley that halts the traveller — and there Gog and his whole throng will be buried, and it will be called 
the Valley of Hamon-Gog. 

Eze 39:12 The House of Israel will take seven months to bury them and cleanse the country. 

Eze 39:13 All the people of the country will dig their graves, thus winning themselves renown, the day when I 
display my glory — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 39:14 And men will be detailed to the permanent duty of going through the country and burying those left 
above ground and cleansing it. They will begin their search once the seven months are over, 

Eze 39:15 and as they go through the country, if one of them sees any human bones, he will set up a marker 

beside them until the gravediggers have buried them in the valley of Hamon-Gog 

Eze 39:16 (and Hamonah is also the name of a town) and have cleansed the country’. 

Eze 39:17 “Son of man, the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Say to the birds of every kind and to all the wild animals: 
Muster, come, gather from everywhere around for the sacrifice I am making for you, a great sacrifice on the 
mountains of Israel, so that you can eat flesh and drink blood. 

Eze 39:18 You will eat the flesh of heroes, you will drink the blood of the princes of the world. They are all rams 
and lambs, goats and fat bulls of Bashan. 

Eze 39:19 You will glut yourselves on fat and drink yourselves drunk on blood at this sacrifice I am making for 



you. 

Eze 39:20 You will glut yourselves at my table on horses and chargers, on heroes and every kind of warrior — 
declares the Lord Yahweh’. 

Eze 39:21 “I shall display my glory to the nations, and all nations will see my sentence when I inflict it and my 
hand when I strike them. 

Eze 39:22 The House of Israel will know that I am Yahweh their God, from that day forward for ever. 

Eze 39:23 The nations too will know that the House of Israel were exiled for their guilt; because they were 
unfaithful to me, I hid my face from them and put them into the clutches of their enemies, so that they all fell by 
the sword. 

Eze 39:24 I treated them as their loathsome acts of infidelity deserved and hid my face from them. 

Eze 39:25 “So, the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘Now I shall bring Jacob’s captives back and take pity on the whole 
House of Israel and show myself jealous for my holy name. 

Eze 39:26 They will forget their disgrace and all the acts of infidelity which they committed against me when 
they were living safely in their own country, with no one to disturb them. 

Eze 39:27 When I bring them home from the peoples, when I gather them back from the countries of their 
enemies, when I display my holiness in them for many nations to see, 

Eze 39:28 they will know that I am Yahweh their God who, having sent them into exile among the nations, have 
reunited them in their own country, not leaving a single one behind. 

Eze 39:29 I shall never hide my face from them again, since I shall pour out my spirit on the House of Israel — 
declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 40:1 In the twenty-fifth year of our captivity, at the beginning of the year, on the tenth day of the month, 
fourteen years to the day from the capture of the city, the hand of Yahweh was on me. He carried me away: 

Eze 40:2 in divine visions, he carried me away to the land of Israel and put me down on a very high mountain, 
on the south of which there seemed to be built a city. 

Eze 40:3 He took me to it, and there I saw a man, whose appearance was like brass. He had a flax cord and a 
measuring rod in his hand and was standing in the gateway. 

Eze 40:4 The man said to me, “Son of man, look carefully, listen closely and pay attention to everything I show 
you, since you have been brought here only for me to show it to you. Tell the House of Israel everything that you 
see”. 

Eze 40:5 Now, the Temple was surrounded on all sides by an outer wall. The man was holding a measuring rod 
six cubits long, each cubit a forearm and a handsbreadth. He measured the thickness of this construction — one 
rod; and its height — one rod. 

Eze 40:6 He went to the east gate, climbed the steps and measured its threshold: one rod deep. 

Eze 40:7 Each guardroom one rod by one rod; and the piers between the guardrooms five cubits thick, and the 
threshold of the gate inwards from the porch of the gate: one rod. 

Eze 40:8 

Eze 40:9 He measured the porch of the gate: eight cubits; its piers: two cubits; the porch of the gate was at the 
inner end. 

Eze 40:10 There were three guardrooms on each side of the east gate, all three of the same size; the piers 
between them all of the same thickness each side. 

Eze 40:1 1 He measured the width of the entrance: ten cubits; and the width all down the gateway: thirteen 
cubits. 

Eze 40:12 There was a rail in front of the guardrooms; each rail on either side was one cubit. And the 
guardrooms on either side were six cubits square. 

Eze 40:13 He measured the width of the gate from the back wall of one guardroom to the back wall of the other; 
it was twenty-five cubits across, the openings being opposite each other. 

Eze 40:14 He measured the porch: twenty cubits; the court surrounded the gate on all sides. 

Eze 40:15 From the front of the entrance gate, to the far end of the porch of the inner gate: fifty cubits. 

Eze 40:16 All round inside the gate there were trellised windows in the guardrooms and in their piers; similarly, 
in the porch there were windows all round and palm trees on the piers. 

Eze 40:17 He then took me to the outer court, which had rooms and a paved terrace going all the way round; 
there were thirty rooms on this terrace. 

Eze 40:18 This terrace, which came up to the sides of the gates and matched their depth, was the Lower 
Terrace. He measured the width of the court, 

Eze 40:19 from the front of the lower gate to the fac ade of the inner court, outside: a hundred cubits (on the 
east and on the north). 

Eze 40:20 He measured the length and breadth of the north gate of the outer court. 

Eze 40:21 It had three guardrooms on each side; its piers and porch were of the same size as those of the first 
gate: fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide. 



Eze 40:22 Its windows, its porch and its palm trees were of the same size as those of the east gate. There were 
seven steps up to it, and its porch was at the inner end. 

Eze 40:23 In the inner court there was, opposite the north gate, a gate like the one opposite the east gate. He 
measured the distance from one gate to the other: a hundred cubits. 

Eze 40:24 He took me to the south side where there was a south gate; he measured its guardrooms, piers and 
porch; they were of the same size as the others. 

Eze 40:25 The gateway, as well as its porch, had windows all round, like the windows of the others; it was fifty 
cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide, 

Eze 40:26 and it had seven steps up to it; its porch was at the inner end and had palm trees on its piers, one on 
either side. 

Eze 40:27 The inner court had a south gate; he measured the distance southwards from one gate to the other: a 
hundred cubits. 

Eze 40:28 He then took me into the inner court by the south gate; he measured the south gate which was of the 
same size as the others. 

Eze 40:29 Its guardrooms, piers and porch were of the same size as the others. 

Eze 40:30 The gateway, as well as its porch, had windows all round; it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five 
cubits wide. 

Eze 40:31 The porch gave on to the outer court. It had palm trees on its piers and eight steps leading up to it. 
Eze 40:32 He took me to the eastern part of the inner court and measured the gate. It was of the same size as 
the others. 

Eze 40:33 Its guardrooms, piers and porch were of the same size as the others. The gateway, as well as its 
porch, had windows all round; it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide. 

Eze 40:34 Its porch gave on to the outer court. There were palm trees on its piers on either side and eight steps 
leading up to it. 

Eze 40:35 He then took me to the north gate and measured it. 

Eze 40:36 Its guardrooms, piers and porch were of the same size as the others. The gateway had windows all 
round; it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide. 

Eze 40:37 Its porch gave on to the outer court. There were palm trees on its piers on either side and eight steps 
leading up to it. 

Eze 40:38 There was a room, the entrance to which was in the porch of the gateway, where they washed the 
burnt offerings. 

Eze 40:39 And inside the porch of the gateway were slabs, two on either side, for slaughtering the burnt 
offerings, the sacrifice for sin and the sacrifice of reparation. 

Eze 40:40 Outside, at the approach to the entrance of the north gate, were two slabs, and on the other side, at 
the porch end of the gate were two slabs. 

Eze 40:41 There were four slabs on one side and four slabs on the other side of the gateway, eight slabs in all, 
on which the slaughtering was done. 

Eze 40:42 There were also four slabs of dressed stone for the burnt offerings, a cubit and a half long, a cubit 
and a half wide and a cubit high, on which the instruments for slaughtering the burnt offerings and sacrifice were 
placed; 

Eze 40:43 runnels a handsbreadth wide went all round the top, and on these slabs was put the sacrificial flesh. 
Eze 40:44 Then he took me into the inner court; there were two rooms in the inner court, one on the side of the 
north gate, facing south, the other on the side of the south gate, facing north. 

Eze 40:45 He told me, “The room looking south is for the priests responsible for the service of the Temple, 

Eze 40:46 and the room looking north is for the priests responsible for the service of the altar. These are the 
sons of Zadok, those of the sons of Levi who approach Yahweh to serve him”. 

Eze 40:47 He measured the court; it was a hundred cubits long and a hundred cubits wide, a square with the 
altar standing in front of the Temple. 

Eze 40:48 He took me to the Ulam of the Temple and measured the piers of the Ulam: five cubits either side; 
and the width of the entrance was three cubits either side. 

Eze 40:49 The length of the Ulam was twenty cubits and its width twelve cubits. There were ten steps leading 
up to it, and there were columns by the piers, one on either side. 

Eze 41:1 He took me to the Hekal and measured its piers: six cubits wide on the one side, six cubits wide on the 
other. 

Eze 41 :2 The width of the entrance was ten cubits, and the returns of the entrance were five cubits on the one 
side and five cubits on the other. He measured its length: forty cubits; and its width: twenty cubits. 

Eze 41 :3 He then went inside and measured the pier at the entrance: two cubits; then the entrance; six cubits; 
and the returns of the entrance: seven cubits. 

Eze 41 :4 He measured its length; twenty cubits; and its width against the Hekal: twenty cubits. He then said to 



me, This is the Holy of Holies”. 

Eze 41 :5 He then measured the wall of the Temple: six cubits. The width of the lateral structure was four cubits, 
all round the Temple. 

Eze 41 :6 The cells were one above the other in three tiers of thirty cells each. The cells were recessed into the 
wall, the wall of the structure comprising the cells, all round, forming offsets; but there were no offsets in the wall 
of the Temple itself. 

Eze 41 :7 The width of the cells increased, storey by storey, corresponding to the amount taken in from the wall 
from one storey to the next, all round the Temple. 

Eze 41 :8 Then I saw that there was a paved terrace all round the Temple. The height of this, which formed the 
base of the side cells, was one complete rod of six cubits. 

Eze 41 :9 The outer wall of the side cells was five cubits thick. There was a passage between the cells of the 
Temple 

Eze 41:10 and the rooms, twenty cubits wide, all round the Temple. 

Eze 41:11 As a way in to the lateral cells on the passage there was one entrance on the north side and one 
entrance on the south side. The width of the passage was five cubits right round. 

Eze 41:12 The building on the west side of the court was seventy cubits wide, the wall of the building was five 
cubits thick all round and its length was ninety cubits. 

Eze 41:13 He measured the length of the Temple: a hundred cubits. 

Eze 41:14 The length of the court plus the building and its walls: a hundred cubits. 

Eze 41:15 He measured the length of the building, along the court, at the back, and its galleries on either side: a 
hundred cubits. The inside of the Hekal and the porches of the court, 

Eze 41:16 the thresholds, the windows, the galleries on three sides, facing the threshold, were panelled with 
wood all round from floor to windows, and the windows were screened with latticework. 

Eze 41:17 From the door to the inner part of the Temple, as well as outside, and on the wall all round, both 
inside and out, 

Eze 41:18 were carved great winged creatures and palm trees, one palm tree between two winged creatures; 
each winged creature had two faces: 

Eze 41:19 a human face turned towards the palm tree on one side and the face of a lion towards the palm tree 
on the other side, throughout the Temple, all round. 

Eze 41 :20 Winged creatures and palm trees were carved on the wall from the floor to above the entrance. 

Eze 41 :21 The doorposts of the Temple were square. In front of the sanctuary there was something like 
Eze 41 :22 a wooden altar, three cubits high and two cubits square. Its corners, base and sides were of wood. 

He said to me, This is the table in the presence of Yahweh”. 

Eze 41 :23 The Hekal had double doors and the sanctuary 

Eze 41 :24 double doors. These doors had two hinged leaves, two leaves for the one door, two leaves for the 
other. 

Eze 41 :25 On them (on the doors of the Hekal), were carved great winged creatures and palm trees like those 
carved on the walls. There was a wooden porch roof on the front of the Ulam on the outside, 

Eze 41 :26 and windows with flanking palm trees on the sides of the Ulam, the cells to the side of the Temple 
and the porch-roofs. 

Eze 42:1 He then took me out into the outer court on the north side and led me to the room facing the court, that 
is to say, to the front of the building on the north side. 

Eze 42:2 Along the front, it was a hundred cubits long on the north side and fifty cubits wide. 

Eze 42:3 Facing the gateways of the inner court and facing the paving of the outer court was a gallery in front of 
the triple gallery, 

Eze 42:4 and in front of the rooms was a walk, ten cubits measured inwards and a hundred cubits long; their 
doors looked north. 

Eze 42:5 The top-floor rooms were narrow because the galleries took up part of the width, being narrower than 
those on the ground floor or those on the middle floor of the building; 

Eze 42:6 these were divided into three storeys and had no columns such as the court had. Hence they were 
narrower than the ground floor ones or the middle-floor ones (below them). 

Eze 42:7 The outer wall parallel to the rooms, facing them and giving onto the outer court, was fifty cubits long, 
Eze 42:8 the length of the rooms facing the outer court being fifty cubits, while for those facing the hall of the 
Temple it was a hundred cubits. 

Eze 42:9 Beneath the rooms there was an entrance from the east, leading in from the outer court. 

Eze 42:10 In the thickness of the wall of the court, on the south side fronting the court and the building, were 
rooms. 

Eze 42:1 1 A walk ran in front of them, as with the rooms built on the north side; they were of the same length 
and breadth, and were of similar design with similar doors in and out. 



Eze 42:12 Before the rooms on the south side there was an entrance at the end of each walk, opposite the 
corresponding wall on the east side, at their entries. 

Eze 42:13 He said to me, The northern and southern rooms giving onto the court are the rooms of the 
sanctuary, in which the priests who approach Yahweh will eat the most holy things. In them will be placed the 
most holy things: the oblation, the sacrifice for sin and the sacrifice of reparation, since this is a holy place. 

Eze 42:14 Once the priests have entered, they will not go out of the holy place into the outer court without 
leaving their liturgical vestments there, since these vestments are holy; they will put on other clothes before 
going near places assigned to the people”. 

Eze 42:15 When he had finished measuring the inside of the Temple, he took me out to the east gate and 
measured it right round the sides. 

Eze 42:16 He measured the east side with his measuring rod: a total of five hundred cubits by the measuring 
rod. 

Eze 42:17 He then measured the north side: a total of five hundred cubits by the measuring rod. 

Eze 42:18 He then measured the south side: five hundred cubits by the measuring rod 

Eze 42:19 was the total. On the west side he measured five hundred cubits by the measuring rod. 

Eze 42:20 He measured the entire enclosing wall on all four sides: length five hundred, breadth five hundred, 
separating the sacred from the profane. 

Eze 43:1 He took me to the gate, the one facing east. 

Eze 43:2 I saw the glory of the God of Israel approaching from the east. A sound came with him like the sound 
of the ocean, and the earth shone with his glory. 

Eze 43:3 This vision was like the one I had seen when I had come for the destruction of the city, and like the 
one I had seen by the River Chebar. Then I fell to the ground. 

Eze 43:4 The glory of Yahweh arrived at the Temple by the east gate. 

Eze 43:5 The Spirit lifted me up and brought me into the inner court; I saw the glory of Yahweh fill the Temple. 
Eze 43:6 And I heard someöne speaking to me from the Temple while the man stood beside me. 

Eze 43:7 He said, “Son of man, this is the dais of my throne, the step on which I rest my feet. I shall live here 
among the Israelites for ever; and the House of Israel, they and their kings, will never again defile my holy name 
with their whorings and the corpses of their kings, 

Eze 43:8 by putting their threshold beside my threshold and their doorposts beside my door-posts, with a party 
wall shared by them and me. They used to defile my holy name by their loathsome practices, and this is why I 
put an end to them in my anger. 

Eze 43:9 From now on they will banish their whorings and the corpses of their kings from my presence and I 
shall live among them for ever. 

Eze 43:10 “Son of man, describe this Temple to the House of Israel, to shame them out of their loathsome 
practices. (Let them draw up the plan of it.) 

Eze 43:1 1 And, if they are ashamed of their behaviour, show them the design and plan of the Temple, its exits 
and entrances, its shape, how all of it is arranged, the entire design and all its principles. Give them all this in 
writing so that they can see and take note of its design and the way it is all arranged and carry it out. 

Eze 43:12 This is the charter of the Temple: all the surrounding space on the mountain top is an especially holy 
area. (Such is the charter of the Temple.)” 

Eze 43:13 These were the dimensions of the altar, in cubits each of a cubit plus a handsbreadth. The base: one 
cubit high and one cubit wide; the space by the runnel, all round the edge of the altar, one handsbreadth. 

Eze 43:14 From the ground level of the base up to the lower plinth, two cubits high and one cubit wide; from the 
lesser plinth to the greater plinth, four cubits high and one cubit wide. 

Eze 43:15 The altar hearth: four cubits high, with four horns projecting from the hearth, 

Eze 43:16 the hearth was four-square: twelve cubits by twelve cubits; 

Eze 43:17 and the square plinth: fourteen cubits by fourteen cubits; and the ledge all round: half a cubit; and the 
base: one cubit all round. The steps were on the east side. 

Eze 43:18 He said to me, “Son of man, the Lord Yahweh says this, ‘As regards the altar, this is how things must 
be done when it has been built for the sacrifice of the burnt offering and for the pouring of blood. 

Eze 43:19 To the levitical priests — those of the race of Zadok — who approach me to serve me — declares the 
Lord Yahweh — you must give a young bull as a sacrifice for sin. 

Eze 43:20 You must take some of its blood and put it on the four horns, on the four corners of the plinth and on 
the surrounding ledge. In this way you will purify it and make expiation on it. 

Eze 43:21 Then take the bull of the sacrifice for sin and burn it in that part of the Temple which is cut off from 
the sanctuary. 

Eze 43:22 On the second day, you must offer an unblemished he-goat as the sacrifice for sin, and the altar must 
be purified again as was done with the bull. 

Eze 43:23 When you have finished the purification, you must offer a young, unblemished bull and an 



unblemished ram from the flock. 

Eze 43:24 You must present them before Yahweh, and the priests will sprinkle salt on them and offer them as 
burnt offerings to Yahweh. 

Eze 43:25 As a sacrifice for sin, every day for seven days you must offer a he-goat, a bull and an unblemished 
ram from the flock. 

Eze 43:26 In this way the altar will be expiated and will be purified and inaugurated. 

Eze 43:27 At the end of that time, on the eighth day and afterwards, the priest will offer your burnt offerings and 
your communion sacrifices on the altar, and I shall look favourably on you — declares the Lord Yahweh’”. 

Eze 44: 1 He brought me back to the outer east gate of the sanctuary. It was shut. 

Eze 44:2 Yahweh said to me, “This gate will be kept shut. No one may open it or go through it, since Yahweh, 
God of Israel, has been through it. And so it must be kept shut. 

Eze 44:3 The prince himself, however, may sit there to take his meal in the presence of Yahweh. He must enter 
and leave through the porch of the gate”. 

Eze 44:4 He led me through the north gate to the front of the Temple. And then I looked; I saw the glory of 
Yahweh filling the Temple of Yahweh; and I fell to the ground. 

Eze 44:5 Yahweh said to me, “Son of man, pay attention, look carefully and listen closely to everything I explain; 
these are all the arrangements of the Temple of Yahweh and all its laws. Be careful about who is admitted to the 
Temple and who is excluded from the sanctuary. 

Eze 44:6 And say to the rebels of the House of Israel, ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: You have gone beyond all 
bounds with all your loathsome practices, House of Israel, 

Eze 44:7 by admitting aliens, uncircumcised in heart and body, to frequent my sanctuary and profane my 
Temple, while offering my food, the fat and the blood, and breaking my covenant with all your loathsome 
practices. 

Eze 44:8 Instead of maintaining the service of my holy things, you have deputed someöne else to maintain my 
service in my sanctuary. 

Eze 44:9 The Lord Yahweh says this: No alien, uncircumcised in heart and body, may enter my sanctuary, none 
of the aliens living among the Israelites. 

Eze 44:10 ‘As regards the Levites who abandoned me when Israel strayed far from me by following its idols, 
they must bear the weight of their own sin. 

Eze 44:1 1 They must be servants in my sanctuary, responsible for guarding the Temple gates and serving the 
Temple. They will kill the burnt offerings and the sacrifice for the people, and hold themselves at the service of 
the people. 

Eze 44: 1 2 Since they used to be at their service in front of their idols and were an occasion of guilt for the 
House of Israel, very well, I stretch out my hand against them — declares the Lord Yahweh — they will bear the 
weight of their guilt. 

Eze 44:13 They may never approach me again to perform the priestly office in my presence, nor touch my holy 
things and my most holy things; they must bear the disgrace of their loathsome practices. 

Eze 44:14 I shall give them the responsibility of serving the Temple; I shall make them responsible for serving it 
and for everything to be done in it. 

Eze 44:15 ‘As regards the levitical priests, the sons of Zadok, who maintained the service of my sanctuary 
when the Israelites strayed far from me, they will approach me to serve me; they will stand in my presence to 
offer me the fat and blood — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 44:16 They will enter my sanctuary and approach my table to serve me; they will maintain my service. 

Eze 44: 1 7 Once they enter the gates of the inner court, they must wear linen vestments; they must wear no 
wool when they serve inside the gates of the inner court and in the Temple. 

Eze 44:18 They must wear linen caps on their heads and linen breeches on their loins; they may not wear 
anything round their waists that makes them sweat. 

Eze 44:19 When they go out to the people in the outer court, they must remove the vestments in which they 
have performed the liturgy and leave them in the rooms of the Holy Place, and put on other clothes, so as not to 
hallow the people with their vestments. 

Eze 44:20 They may neither shave their heads nor let their hair grow long, but must cut their hair carefully. 

Eze 44:21 No priest may drink wine on the day he enters the inner court. 

Eze 44:22 They may not marry widows or divorced women, but only virgins of the race of Israel; they may, 
however, marry a widow, if she is the widow of a priest. 

Eze 44:23 They must teach my people the difference between what is sacred and what is profane and make 
them understand the difference between what is clean and what is unclean. 

Eze 44:24 They must be judges in law-suits; they must judge in the spirit of my judgements; they must follow my 
laws and ordinances at all my feasts and keep my Sabbaths holy. 

Eze 44:25 They may not go near a dead person, in case they become unclean, except in these permissible 



cases, that is, for father, mother, daughter, son, brother or unmarried sister. 

Eze 44:26 After one of them has been purified, seven days must elapse; 

Eze 44:27 then, the day he enters the Holy Place in the inner court to minister in the Holy Place, he must offer 
his sacrifice for sin — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 44:28 They may have no heritage; I myself shall be their heritage. You may give them no patrimony in 
Israel; I myself shall be their patrimony. 

Eze 44:29 Their food must be the oblation, the sacrifice for sin and the sacrifice of reparation. Everything 
dedicated by vow in Israel shall be for them. 

Eze 44:30 The best of all your first-fruits and of all the dues and of everything you offer, must go to the priests; 
and the best of your dough you must also give to the priests, so that a blessing may rest on your house. 

Eze 44:31 Priests must not eat the flesh of anything that has died a natural death or been savaged, be it bird or 
animal’”. 

Eze 45:1 “‘When you draw lots to divide the country by heritage, you must set a sacred portion of the country 
aside for Yahweh: twenty-five thousand cubits long and twenty thousand wide. The whole of this land must be 
sacred, 

Eze 45:2 and of this an area five hundred by five hundred cubits must be for the sanctuary, with a boundary fifty 
cubits wide right round. 

Eze 45:3 Out of this area you must also measure a section twenty-five thousand by ten thousand cubits, in 
which will be the sanctuary, the Holy of Holies. 

Eze 45:4 This will be the sacred portion of the country, belonging to the priests who officiate in the sanctuary 
and approach Yahweh to serve him. It will contain room for their houses and room for the sanctuary. 

Eze 45:5 A portion twenty-five thousand by ten thousand cubits will be owned by the Levites serving the 
Temple, with towns for them to live in. 

Eze 45:6 You must give the city possession of an area five thousand by twenty-five thousand cubits, near the 
land belonging to the sanctuary; this must be for the whole House of Israel. 

Eze 45:7 ‘The prince must have a territory either side of the sacred portion and of the property of the city, 
adjacent to the sacred portion and the property of the city, stretching westwards from the west and eastwards 
from the east, its size equal to one of the portions between the west and the east frontiers 
Eze 45:8 of the country. This will be his property in Israel. Then my princes will no longer oppress my people; 
they must leave the rest of the country for the House of Israel, for its tribes. 

Eze 45:9 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: Enough, princes of Israel! Give up your violence and plundering, do what 
is upright and just, stop crushing my people with taxation — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 45:10 Have fair scales, a fair <i>ephah</i>, a fair bat. 

Eze 45:1 1 Let the <i>ephah</i> and bat be equal, let the bat hold one-tenth of a <i>homer</i> and the <i>ephah</i> one-tenth of a 
<i>homer</i>. Let the measures be based on the <i>homer</i>. 

Eze 45:12 The shekel must be twenty <i>gerah</i>. Twenty shekels, twenty-five shekels and fifteen shekels must 
make one mina. 

Eze 45:13 ‘This is the offering that you must levy: the sixth of an <i>ephah</i> for every <i>homer</i> of wheat, and the sixth 
of an <i>ephah</i> for every <i>homer</i> of barley. 

Eze 45:14 The dues on oil: one bat of oil out of every ten bat or out of every kor (which is equal to ten bat or one 
<i>homer</i>, since ten bat equal one <i>homer</i>). 

Eze 45:15 You must levy one sheep on every flock of two hundred from the pastures of Israel for the oblation, 
the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifice. This must form your expiation — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 45:16 Let all the people of the country be subject to this due for the prince of Israel. 

Eze 45:17 The prince must make himself responsible for providing the burnt offerings, the oblation and the 
libations for feasts, New Moons, Sabbaths and all the solemn festivals of the House of Israel. He must provide 
the sacrifice for sin, the oblation, the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices to make expiation for the 
House of Israel. 

Eze 45:18 ‘The Lord Yahweh says this: On the first day of the first month, you must take a young bull without 
blemish, to purify the sanctuary. 

Eze 45:19 The priest must take blood from the sacrifice for sin and put it on the doorposts of the Temple, on the 
four corners of the altar plinth and on the doorposts of the gates of the inner court. 

Eze 45:20 You must do the same on the seventh of the month, on behalf of anyone who has sinned through 
inadvertence or ignorance. This is how you must make expiation for the Temple. 

Eze 45:21 On the fourteenth day of the first month, you must celebrate the feast of the Passover. For seven 
days everyone must eat unleavened loaves. 

Eze 45:22 On that day, the prince must offer a bull as a sacrifice for sin, for himself and all the people of the 
country. 

Eze 45:23 For the seven days of the feast, he must offer Yahweh burnt offerings of seven bulls and seven rams 



without blemish, daily for a week, and one he-goat daily as a sacrifice for sin, 

Eze 45:24 and as an oblation, one <i>ephah</i> for each bull and one <i>ephah</i> for each ram, and a <i>hin</i> of oil for every 
<i>ephah</i>. 

Eze 45:25 ‘For the feast that falls on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, he must do the same for seven 
days, offering the sacrifice for sin, the burnt offerings, the oblation and the oil’”. 

Eze 46:1 “‘The Lord Yahweh says this: The east gate of the inner court must be kept shut for the six working 
days. On the Sabbath day, however, it must be opened, as also on the day of the New Moon; 

Eze 46:2 and the prince must go in through the porch of the outer gate and take his position by the doorposts of 
the gate. The priests must then offer his burnt offerings and his communion sacrifice. He must prostrate himself 
on the threshold of the gate and go out, and the gate must not be shut again until the evening. 

Eze 46:3 The people of the country must prostrate themselves in the presence of Yahweh at the entrance to the 
gate on Sabbaths and days of the New Moon. 

Eze 46:4 The burnt offering offered to Yahweh by the prince on the Sabbath day must consist of six 
unblemished lambs and one unblemished ram, 

Eze 46:5 with an oblation of one <i>ephah</i> for the ram, and such oblation as he pleases for the lambs, and a <i>hin</i> of 
oil for every <i>ephah</i>. 

Eze 46:6 On the day of the New Moon it must consist of an unblemished young bull, six unblemished lambs and 
one unblemished ram, 

Eze 46:7 when he must make an oblation of one <i>ephah</i> for the bull and one <i>ephah</i> for the ram, and what he 
pleases for the lambs, and a <i>hin</i> of oil for every <i>ephah</i>. 

Eze 46:8 ‘When the prince goes in, he must enter by the porch of the gate, and he must leave by the same way. 
Eze 46:9 When the people of the country come into the presence of Yahweh at the solemn festivals, those who 
have come in by the north gate to prostrate themselves must go out by the south gate, and those who have 
come in by the south gate must go out by the north gate; no one must turn back to leave through the gate by 
which he entered but must go out on the opposite side. 

Eze 46:10 The prince will be with them, coming in like them and going out like them. 

Eze 46:1 1 ‘On feast days and solemn festivals the oblation must be one <i>ephah</i> for every bull, one <i>ephah</i> for 
every ram, what he pleases for the lambs, and a <i>hin</i> of oil for every <i>ephah</i>. 

Eze 46:12 When the prince offers Yahweh voluntary burnt offerings or a voluntary communion sacrifice, the east 
gate must be opened for him, and he must offer his burnt offerings and his communion sacrifice as he does on 
the Sabbath day; when he has gone out, the gate must be shut after him. 

Eze 46:13 Every day he must offer an unblemished lamb one year old as a burnt offering to Yahweh; he must 
offer this every morning. 

Eze 46:14 Every morning in addition he must offer an oblation of one-sixth of an <i>ephah</i> and one-third of a <i>hin</i> of 
oil, for mixing with the flour. This is the oblation to Yahweh, a perpetual decree, fixed for ever. 

Eze 46:15 The lamb, the oblation and the oil must be offered morning after morning for ever. 

Eze 46:16 ‘Lord Yahweh says this: If the prince presents part of his hereditary portion to one of his sons, the gift 
must pass into the ownership of his sons and become their hereditary property. 

Eze 46:17 If, however, he presents part of his hereditary portion to one of his slaves, it will belong to the man 
only until the year of liberation and then must revert to the prince. Only his sons may retain his hereditary 
portion. 

Eze 46:18 The prince may not take any part of the people’s hereditary portion, thus robbing them of what is 
theirs; he must provide the patrimony of his sons out of his own property, so that no member of my people is 
robbed of what is his!’”. 

Eze 46:19 He took me through the entrance at the side of the north gate that leads to the rooms of the Holy 
Place set apart for the priests. And there before us, to the west, was a space at the end. 

Eze 46:20 He said to me, This is where the priests must boil the slaughtered animals for the sacrifice for sin 
and the sacrifice of reparation, and where they must bake the oblation, without having to carry them into the 
outer court and so run the risk of hallowing the people”. 

Eze 46:21 He then took me into the outer court and led me to each of its four corners; in each corner of the 
outer court was a compound; 

Eze 46:22 in other words, the four corners of the court contained four small compounds, forty cubits by thirty, all 
four being the same size. 

Eze 46:23 All four were enclosed by a wall, with hearths all round the bottom of the wall. 

Eze 46:24 He said, “These are the kitchens where the Temple servants must boil the sacrifices offered by the 
people”. 

Eze 47:1 He brought me back to the entrance of the Temple, where a stream flowed eastwards from under the 
Temple threshold, for the Temple faced east. The water flowed from under the right side of the Temple, south of 
the altar. 



Eze 47:2 He took me out by the north gate and led me right round outside as far as the outer east gate where 
the water flowed out on the right-hand side. 

Eze 47:3 The man went off to the east holding his measuring line and measured off a thousand cubits; he then 
made me wade across the stream; the water reached my ankles. 

Eze 47:4 He measured off another thousand and made me wade across the stream again; the water reached 
my knees. He measured off another thousand and made me wade across the stream again; the water reached 
my waist. 

Eze 47:5 He measured off another thousand; it was now a river which I could not cross; the stream had swollen 
and was now deep water, a river impossible to cross. 

Eze 47:6 He then said, “Do you see, son of man?”. He then took me and brought me back to the bank on the 
river. 

Eze 47:7 Now, when I reached it, I saw an enormous number of trees on each bank of the river. 

Eze 47:8 He said, “This water flows east down to the Arabah and to the sea; and flowing into the sea it makes 
its waters wholesome. 

Eze 47:9 Wherever the river flows, all living creatures teeming in it will live. Fish will be very plentiful, for 
wherever the water goes it brings health, and life teems wherever the river flows. 

Eze 47:10 There will be fishermen on its banks. Fishing nets will be spread from En-Gedi to En-Eglaim. The 
species of fish will be the same as the fish of the Great Sea. 

Eze 47:1 1 The marshes and lagoons, however, will not become wholesome, but will remain salt. 

Eze 47:12 Along the river, on either bank, will grow every kind of fruit tree with leaves that never wither and fruit 
that never fails; they will bear new fruit every month, because this water comes from the sanctuary. And their 
fruit will be good to eat and the leaves medicinal”. 

Eze 47:13 “The Lord Yahweh says this, ‘This will be the territory which you must distribute among the twelve 
tribes of Israel, with two portions for Joseph. 

Eze 47:14 You will each have a fair share of it, since I swore to your fathers that I would give it to them, and this 
country now falls to you as your heritage. 

Eze 47:15 These will be the frontiers of the country. On the north, from the Great Sea, the road from Hethlon to 
the Pass of Hamath, Zedad, 

Eze 47:16 Berothah, Sibraim lying between the territories of Damascus and Hamath, to Hazer-ha-Tikon on the 
borders of Hauran; 

Eze 47:17 the frontier will extend from the sea to Hazer-Enon, with the territory of Damascus and the territory of 
Hamath to the north; that will be the northern frontier. 

Eze 47:18 On the east, the Jordan will serve as frontier between Hauran and Damascus, between Gilead and 
Israel, down to the Eastern Sea as far as Tamar; that will be the eastern frontier. 

Eze 47:19 On the south, from Tamar southward to the Waters of Meribah in Kadesh, to the Wadi and the Great 
Sea; that will be the southern frontier. 

Eze 47:20 And to the west, the Great Sea will serve as frontier up to the point opposite the Pass of Hamath; that 
will be the western frontier. 

Eze 47:21 You must distribute this country among yourselves, among the tribes of Israel. 

Eze 47:22 You must distribute it as a heritage for yourselves and the aliens settled among you who have 
fathered children among you, since you must treat them as citizens of Israel. They must draw lots for their 
heritage with you, among the tribes of Israel. 

Eze 47:23 You will give the alien his heritage in the tribe where he has settled — declares the Lord Yahweh.” “ 
Eze 48:1 “‘This is the list of the tribes. One portion in the far north by way of Hethlon to the Pass of Hamath, to 
Hazer-Enon, with the territory of Damascus to the north, and marching with Hamath, from the eastern limit to the 
western limit: Dan. 

Eze 48:2 One portion bordering Dan, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Asher. 

Eze 48:3 One portion bordering Asher, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Naphtali. 

Eze 48:4 One portion bordering Naphtali, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Manasseh. 

Eze 48:5 One portion bordering Manasseh, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Ephraim. 

Eze 48:6 One portion bordering Ephraim, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Reuben. 

Eze 48:7 One portion bordering Reuben, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Judah. 

Eze 48:8 One portion bordering Judah, from the eastern limit to the western limit, is the portion which you must 
set aside, twenty-five thousand cubits wide, and as long as each of the other portions from the eastern limit to 
the western limit. The sanctuary will be in the centre of it. 

Eze 48:9 ‘The portion which you must set aside for Yahweh must be twenty-five thousand cubits long and ten 
thousand cubits wide. 

Eze 48:10 This sacred portion must belong to the priests, being, on the north side, twenty-five thousand cubits; 
on the west side ten thousand cubits wide, on the east side ten thousand cubits wide and on the south side 



twenty-five thousand cubits long; the sanctuary of Yahweh will be in the centre of it. 

Eze 48:1 1 This will be for the consecrated priests, those of the sons of Zadok who maintained my liturgy and did 
not go astray with the straying Israelites, as the Levites went astray. 

Eze 48:12 And so their portion must be taken out of the especially holy portion of the land, near the territory of 
the Levites. 

Eze 48:13 The territory of the Levites, like the territory of the priests, must be twenty-five thousand cubits long 
and ten thousand wide — the whole length being twenty-five thousand and the width ten thousand. 

Eze 48:14 It will be illegal for them to sell or exchange any part of it, and the domain can never be alienated, 
since it is consecrated to Yahweh. 

Eze 48:15 As regards the remainder, an area of five thousand cubits by twenty-five thousand, this must be for 
the common use of the city, for houses and pastures. In the middle will be the city. 

Eze 48:16 These will be its dimensions: on the north side, four thousand five hundred cubits; on the south side, 
four thousand five hundred cubits; on the east side, four thousand five hundred cubits; on the west side, four 
thousand five hundred cubits. 

Eze 48:17 The pasture land of the city must extend two hundred and fifty cubits to the north, two hundred and 
fifty to the south, two hundred and fifty to the east, two hundred and fifty to the west. 

Eze 48:18 One strip, contiguous to the sacred portion, must be left over, consisting often thousand cubits to 
eastward and ten thousand to westward, marching with the sacred portion; this will bring in a revenue for feeding 
the municipal workmen. 

Eze 48:19 And the municipal workmen, drawn from all the tribes of Israel, will farm it. 

Eze 48:20 The portion must have a total area of twenty-five thousand cubits by twenty-five thousand. You must 
allocate a square area from the sacred portion to constitute the city. 

Eze 48:21 What is left over will be for the prince, on either side of the sacred portion and of the property of the 
city, marching with the twenty-five thousand cubits to eastward to the eastern frontier, and marching with the 
twenty-five thousand cubits to westward to the western frontier — running parallel with the other portions and 
belonging to the prince. In the centre will be the sacred portion and the sanctuary of the Temple. 

Eze 48:22 Thus, apart from the property of the Levites and the property of the city which lie in the middle of the 
prince’s portion, everything between the borders of Judah and the borders of Ben- jamin must belong to the 
prince. 

Eze 48:23 ‘As regards the rest of the tribes: One portion from the eastern limit to the western limit: Benjamin. 
Eze 48:24 One portion bordering Benjamin, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Simeon. 

Eze 48:25 One portion bordering Simeon, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Issachar. 

Eze 48:26 One portion bordering Issachar, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Zebulun. 

Eze 48:27 One portion bordering Zebulun, from the eastern limit to the western limit: Gad. 

Eze 48:28 On the southern border of Gad, on the south side, the border will run from Tamar to the Waters of 
Meribah in Kadesh, to the Wadi and the Great Sea. 

Eze 48:29 This is how you must distribute the country to the tribes of Israel as their heritage, and these must be 
their portions — declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Eze 48:30 ‘Here are the exits from the city. On the north side, four thousand five hundred cubits are to be 
measured off. 

Eze 48:31 The gates of the city are to be named after the tribes of Israel. Three gates to the north: one the gate 
of Reuben; one the gate of Judah; one the gate of Levi. 

Eze 48:32 On the east side, there will be four thousand five hundred cubits and three gates: one the gate of 
Joseph; one the gate of Benjamin; one the gate of Dan. 

Eze 48:33 On the south side, four thousand five hundred cubits are to be measured off, and there are to be 
three gates: one the gate of Simeon; one the gate of Issachar; one the gate of Zebulun. 

Eze 48:34 On the west side, there will be four thousand five hundred cubits and three gates: one the gate of 
Gad; one the gate of Asher; one the gate of Naphtali. 

Eze 48:35 Total perimeter: eighteen thousand cubits. ‘The name of the city in future must be: Yahweh-is-there’. 

i 

Dan 1:1 In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon marched on 
Jerusalem and besieged it. 

Dan 1 :2 The Lord let Jehoiakim king of Judah fall into his power, as well as some of the vessels belonging to the 
Temple of God. These he took away to Shinar, putting the vessels into the treasury of his own gods. 

Dan 1 :3 From the Israelites, the king ordered Ashpenaz, his chief eunuch, to bring a certain number of boys of 
royal or noble descent; 

Dan 1:4 they had to be without any physical defect, of good appearance, versed in every branch of wisdom, 
well-informed, discerning, suitable for service at the royal court. Ashpenaz was to teach them to speak and write 
the language of the Chaldaeans. 



Dan 1:5 The king assigned them a daily allowance of food and wine from the royal table. They were to receive 
an education lasting for three years, after which they would enter the royal service. 

Dan 1:6 Among them were the Judaeans Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah. 

Dan 1:7 The chief eunuch gave them other names, calling Daniel Belteshazzar, Hananiah Shadrach, Mishael 
Meshach, and Azariah Abed-Nego. 

Dan 1 :8 Daniel, who was determined not to incur pollution by food and wine from the royal table, begged the 
chief eunuch to spare him this defilement. 

Dan 1 :9 God allowed Daniel to receive faithful love and sympathy from the chief eunuch. 

Dan 1:10 But the eunuch warned Daniel, “I am afraid of my lord the king: he has assigned you food and drink, 
and if he sees you looking thinner in the face than the other boys of your age, my head will be in danger with the 
king because of you”. 

Dan 1:11 To the guard assigned to Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah by the chief eunuch, Daniel then 
said, 

Dan 1:12 “Please allow your servants a ten days’ trial, during which we are given only vegetables to eat and 
water to drink. 

Dan 1:13 You can then compare our looks with those of the boys who eat the king’s food; go by what you see, 
and treat your servants accordingly”. 

Dan 1:14 The man agreed to do what they asked and put them on ten days’ trial. 

Dan 1:15 When the ten days were over, they looked better and fatter than any of the boys who had eaten their 
allowance from the royal table; 

Dan 1:16 so the guard withdrew their allowance of food and the wine they were to drink, and gave them 
vegetables. 

Dan 1:17 To these four boys God gave knowledge and skill in every aspect of literature and learning; Daniel 
also had the gift of interpreting every kind of vision and dream. 

Dan 1:18 When the time stipulated by the king for the boys to be presented to him came round, the chief 
eunuch presented them to Nebuchadnezzar. 

Dan 1:19 The king conversed with them, and among all the boys found none to equal Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael 
and Azariah. So they became members of the king’s court, 

Dan 1 :20 and on whatever point of wisdom or understanding he might question them, he found them ten times 
better than all the magicians and soothsayers in his entire kingdom. Daniel remained there until the first year of 
King Cyrus. 

Dan 2:1 In the second year of his reign, Nebuchadnezzar had a series of dreams; he was perturbed by this and 
sleep deserted him. 

Dan 2:2 The king then had magicians and soothsayers, sorcerers and Chaldaeans summoned to tell him what 
his dreams meant. They arrived and stood in the king’s presence. 

Dan 2:3 The king said to them, “I have had a dream, and my mind is troubled by a wish to understand it”. 

Dan 2:4 The Chaldaeans answered the king: “May your majesty live for ever! Tell your servants the dream, and 
we shall reveal its meaning for you”. 

Dan 2:5 The king answered the Chaldaeans, “This is my firm resolve: if you cannot tell me what I dreamt and 
what it means, I shall have you torn limb from limb and your houses turned into dunghills. 

Dan 2:6 If, on the other hand, you can tell me what I dreamt and what it means, I shall give you presents, 
rewards and high honour. So tell me what I dreamt and what it means”. 

Dan 2:7 A second time they said, “Let the king tell his dream to his servants, and we shall reveal its meaning”. 
Dan 2:8 But the king retorted, “It is plain to me that you are trying to gain time, knowing my proclaimed resolve. 
Dan 2:9 If you do not interpret my dream for me, there will be but one sentence passed on you all; you have 
agreed among yourselves to make me misleading and tortuous speeches while the time goes by. So tell me 
what my dream was, and then I shall know whether you can interpret it”. 

Dan 2:10 The Chaldaeans answered the king, “Nobody in the world could explain the king’s problem; what is 
more, no other king, governor or chief would think of putting such a question to any magician, soothsayer or 
Chaldaean. 

Dan 2:1 1 The question the king asks is difficult, and no one can find the king an answer to it, except the gods, 
whose dwelling is not with mortals”. 

Dan 2:12 At this the king flew into a rage and ordered all the Babylonian sages to be put to death. 

Dan 2:13 On publication of the decree to have the sages killed, search was made for Daniel and his 
companions to have them put to death. 

Dan 2:14 Then, with shrewd and cautious words, Daniel approached Arioch, the king’s chief executioner, when 
he was on his way to kill the Babylonian sages. 

Dan 2:15 To this royal official Arioch he said, “Why has the king issued such a harsh decree?”. Arioch explained 
matters to Daniel, 



Dan 2:16 and Daniel went off to ask the king for a stay of execution to give him the opportunity of revealing his 
interpretation to the king. 

Dan 2:17 Daniel then went home and told his friends Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah what had happened, 

Dan 2:18 urging them to beg the God of heaven to show his mercy and explain the mysterious secret, so that 
Daniel and his friends might be spared the fate of the other Babylonian sages. 

Dan 2:19 The mystery was then revealed to Daniel in a night-vision, and Daniel blessed the God of heaven. 

Dan 2:20 This is what Daniel said: May the name of God be blessed for ever and ever, since wisdom and power 
are his alone. 

Dan 2:21 It is he who controls the procession of times and seasons, who makes and unmakes kings, who 
confers wisdom on the wise, and knowledge on those with discernment, 

Dan 2:22 who uncovers depths and mysteries, who knows what lies in darkness; and light dwells with him. 

Dan 2:23 To you, God of my fathers, I give thanks and praise for having given me wisdom and strength: to me 
you have explained what we asked you, to us you have explained the king’s problem. 

Dan 2:24 So Daniel went to see Arioch, whom the king had made responsible for putting the Babylonian sages 
to death. Going in, he said, “Do not put the Babylonian sages to death. Take me into the king’s presence and I 
will reveal the meaning to the king”. 

Dan 2:25 Arioch lost no time in bringing Daniel to the king. “Among the exiles from Judah”, he said, “I have 
discovered a man who can reveal the meaning to the king”. 

Dan 2:26 The king said to Daniel (who had been given the name Belteshazzar), “Can you tell me what I dreamt 
and what it means?”. 

Dan 2:27 Facing the king, Daniel replied, “None of the sages, soothsayers, magicians or exorcists has been 
able to tell the king the truth of the mystery which the king has propounded; 

Dan 2:28 but there is a God in heaven who reveals mysteries and who has shown King Nebuchadnezzar what 
is to take place in the final days. These, then, are the dream and the visions that passed through your head as 
you lay in bed: 

Dan 2:29 “Your Majesty, on your bed your thoughts turned to what would happen in the future, and the Revealer 
of Mysteries disclosed to you what is to take place. 

Dan 2:30 This mystery has been revealed to me, not that I am wiser than anyone else, but for this sole purpose: 
that the king should learn what it means, and that you should understand your inmost thoughts. 

Dan 2:31 “You have had a vision, Your Majesty; this is what you saw: a statue, a great statue of extreme 
brightness, stood before you, terrible to see. 

Dan 2:32 The head of this statue was of fine gold, its chest and arms were of silver, its belly and thighs of 
bronze, 

Dan 2:33 its legs of iron, its feet part iron, part clay. 

Dan 2:34 While you were gazing, a stone broke away, untouched by any hand, and struck the statue, struck its 
feet of iron and clay and shattered them. 

Dan 2:35 Then, iron and clay, bronze, silver and gold, all broke into pieces as fine as chaff on the threshing-floor 
in summer. The wind blew them away, leaving not a trace behind. And the stone that had struck the statue grew 
into a great mountain, filling the whole world. 

Dan 2:36 This was the dream; we shall now explain to the king what it means. 

Dan 2:37 “You, Your Majesty, king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given sovereignty, power, strength 
and honour- 

Dan 2:38 human beings, wild animals, birds of the air, wherever they live, he has entrusted to your rule, making 
you king of them all — you are the golden head. 

Dan 2:39 And, after you, another kingdom will rise, not as great as yours, and then a third, of bronze, which will 
rule the whole world. 

Dan 2:40 There will be a fourth kingdom, hard as iron, as iron that pulverises and crushes all. Like iron that 
breaks everything to pieces, it will crush and break all the earlier kingdoms. 

Dan 2:41 The feet you saw, part earthenware, part iron, are a kingdom which will be split in two, but which will 
retain something of the strength of iron, just as you saw the iron and the clay of the earthenware mixed together. 
Dan 2:42 The feet were part iron, part potter’s clay: the kingdom will be partly strong and partly brittle. 

Dan 2:43 And just as you saw the iron and the clay of the earthenware mixed together, so the two will be mixed 
together in human seed; but they will not hold together any more than iron will blend with clay. 

Dan 2:44 In the days of those kings, the God of heaven will set up a kingdom which will never be destroyed, and 
this kingdom will not pass into the hands of another race: it will shatter and absorb all the previous kingdoms and 
itself last for ever- 

Dan 2:45 just as you saw a stone, untouched by hand, break away from the mountain and reduce iron, bronze, 
earthenware, silver and gold to powder. The Great God has shown the king what is to take place. The dream is 
true, the interpretation exact”. 



Dan 2:46 At this, King Nebuchadnezzar fell prostrate before Daniel; he gave orders for Daniel to be offered an 
oblation and a fragrant sacrifice. 

Dan 2:47 The king said to Daniel, “Your god is indeed the God of gods, the Master of kings, and the Revealer of 
Mysteries, since you have been able to reveal this mystery”. 

Dan 2:48 The king then conferred high rank on Daniel and gave him many handsome presents. He also made 
him governor of the whole province of Babylon and head of all the sages of Babylon. 

Dan 2:49 At Daniel’s request, the king entrusted the affairs of the province of Babylon to Shadrach, Meshach 
and Abed-Nego; Daniel himself remained in attendance on the king. 

Dan 3:1 King Nebuchadnezzar had a golden statue made, sixty cubits high and six cubits wide, which he set up 
on the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon. 

Dan 3:2 King Nebuchadnezzar then summoned the satraps, magistrates, governors, counsellors, treasurers, 
judges, lawyers, and all the provincial authorities to assemble and attend the dedication of the statue set up by 
King Nebuchadnezzar. 

Dan 3:3 Satraps, magistrates, governors, counsellors, treasurers, judges, lawyers and all the provincial 
authorities then assembled for the dedication of the statue set up by King Nebuchadnezzar and stood in front of 
the statue which King Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 

Dan 3:4 A herald then loudly proclaimed: “Peoples, nations, languages! Thus are you commanded: 

Dan 3:5 the moment you hear the sound of horn, pipe, lyre, zither, harp, bagpipe and every other kind of 
instrument, you will prostrate yourselves and worship the golden statue set up by King Nebuchadnezzar. 

Dan 3:6 Anyone who does not prostrate himself and worship will immediately be thrown into the burning fiery 
furnace”. 

Dan 3:7 And so, the instant all the peoples heard the sound of horn, pipe, lyre, zither, harp, bagpipe and all the 
other instruments, all the peoples, nations and languages prostrated themselves and worshipped the statue set 
up by King Nebuchadnezzar. 

Dan 3:8 Some Chaldaeans then came forward and maliciously accused the Jews. 

Dan 3:9 They said to King Nebuchadnezzar, “May Your Majesty live for ever! 

Dan 3:10 You have issued a decree, Your Majesty, to the effect that everyone on hearing the sound of horn, 
pipe, lyre, zither, harp, bagpipe and every other kind of instrument is to prostrate himself and worship the golden 
statue; 

Dan 3:1 1 and that anyone who does not prostrate himself and worship is to be thrown into the burning fiery 
furnace. 

Dan 3:12 Now, there are certain Jews to whom you have entrusted the affairs of the province of Babylon: 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego; these men have ignored your command, Your Majesty; they do not serve 
your gods, and refuse to worship the golden statue you have set up”. 

Dan 3:13 Shaking with fury, Nebuchadnezzar sent for Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego. The men were 
immediately brought before the king. 

Dan 3:14 Nebuchadnezzar addressed them, “Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego, is it true that you do not 
serve my gods, and that you refuse to worship the golden statue I have set up? 

Dan 3:15 When you hear the sound of horn, pipe, lyre, zither, harp, bagpipe and every other kind of instrument, 
are you prepared to prostrate yourselves and worship the statue I have made? If you refuse to worship it, you 
will be thrown forthwith into the burning fiery furnace; then which of the gods could save you from my power?”. 
Dan 3:16 Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego replied to King Nebuchadnezzar, “Your question needs no 
answer from us: 

Dan 3:17 if our God, the one we serve, is able to save us from the burning fiery furnace and from your power, 
Your Majesty, he will save us; 

Dan 3:18 and even if he does not, then you must know, Your Majesty, that we will not serve your god or worship 
the statue you have set up”. 

Dan 3:19 This infuriated King Nebuchadnezzar; his expression was changed now as he looked at Shadrach, 
Meshach and Abed-Nego. He gave orders for the furnace to be made seven times hotter than usual 
Dan 3:20 and commanded certain stalwarts from his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego and 
throw them into the burning fiery furnace. 

Dan 3:21 They were then bound in their cloaks, trousers, headgear and other garments, and thrown into the 
burning fiery furnace. 

Dan 3:22 The king’s command was so urgent and the heat of the furnace was so fierce, that the men carrying 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego were burnt to death by the flames from the fire; 

Dan 3:23 the three men, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego fell, bound, into the burning fiery furnace. 

Dan 3:24 And they walked in the heart of the flames, praising God and blessing the Lord. 

Dan 3:25 Azariah stood in the heart of the fire, praying aloud thus: 

Dan 3:26 May you be blessed and revered, Lord, God of our ancestors, may your name be held glorious for 



ever. 

Dan 3:27 For you are upright in all that you have done for us, all your deeds are true, all your ways right, all your 
judgements true. 

Dan 3:28 True is the sentence you have given in all that you have brought down on us and on Jerusalem, the 
holy city of our ancestors, for you have treated us rightly and truly, as our sins deserve. 

Dan 3:29 Yes, we have sinned and committed a crime by deserting you, yes, we have greatly sinned; we have 
not listened to your commandments, 

Dan 3:30 we have not observed them, we have not done what you commanded us to do for our own good. 

Dan 3:31 Yes, all that you have brought down on us, all that you have done to us, you have been fully justified 
in doing. 

Dan 3:32 You have handed us over to our enemies, to a lawless people, the worst of the godless, to an unjust 
king, the worst in the whole world; 

Dan 3:33 today we have no right to open our mouths, shame and dishonour are the lot of those who serve and 
worship you. 

Dan 3:34 Do not abandon us for ever, for the sake of your name; do not repudiate your covenant, 

Dan 3:35 do not withdraw your favour from us, for the sake of Abraham, your friend, of Isaac, your servant, and 
of Israel, your holy one, 

Dan 3:36 to whom you promised to make their descendants as many as the stars of heaven and as the grains 
of sand on the seashore. 

Dan 3:37 Lord, we have become the least of all nations, we are put to shame today throughout the world, 
because of our sins. 

Dan 3:38 We now have no leader, no prophet, no prince, no burnt offering, no sacrifice, no oblation, no incense, 
no place where we can make offerings to you 

Dan 3:39 and win your favour. But may the contrite soul, the humbled spirit, be as acceptable to you 
Dan 3:40 as burnt offerings of rams and bullocks, as thousands of fat lambs: such let our sacrifice be to you 
today, and may it please you that we follow you whole-heartedly, since those who trust in you will not be 
shamed. 

Dan 3:41 And now we put our whole heart into following you, into fearing you and seeking your face once more. 
Dan 3:42 Do not abandon us to shame but treat us in accordance with your gentleness, in accordance with the 
greatness of your mercy. 

Dan 3:43 Rescue us in accordance with your wonderful deeds and win fresh glory for your name, O Lord. 

Dan 3:44 Confusion seize all who ill-treat your servants: may they be covered with shame, deprived of all their 
power, and may their strength be broken. 

Dan 3:45 Let them learn that you alone are God and Lord, glorious over the whole world. 

Dan 3:46 All this time, the king’s servants, who had thrown them into the furnace, had been stoking it with crude 
oil, pitch, tow and brushwood 

Dan 3:47 until the flames rose forty-nine cubits above the furnace 

Dan 3:48 and, leaping out, burnt those Chaldaeans to death who were standing round it. 

Dan 3:49 But the angel of the Lord came down into the furnace beside Azariah and his companions; he drove 
the flames of the fire outwards from the furnace 

Dan 3:50 and, in the heart of the furnace, wafted a coolness to them as of the breeze and dew, so that the fire 
did not touch them at all and caused them no pain or distress. 

Dan 3:51 Then all three in unison began to sing, glorifying and blessing God in the furnace, with the words: 

Dan 3:52 May you be blessed, Lord, God of our ancestors, be praised and extolled for ever. Blessed be your 
glorious and holy name, praised and extolled for ever. 

Dan 3:53 May you be blessed in the Temple of your sacred glory, exalted and glorified above all for ever: 

Dan 3:54 blessed on the throne of your kingdom, exalted above all, glorified for ever: 

Dan 3:55 blessed are you who fathom the abyss, enthroned on the winged creatures, praised and exalted 
above all for ever: 

Dan 3:56 blessed in the expanse of the heavens, exalted and glorified for ever. 

Dan 3:57 Bless the Lord, all the Lord’s creation: praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:58 Bless the Lord, angels of the Lord, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:59 Bless the Lord, heavens, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:60 Bless the Lord, all the waters above the heavens, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:61 Bless the Lord, powers of the Lord, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:62 Bless the Lord, sun and moon, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:63 Bless the Lord, stars of heaven, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:64 Bless the Lord, all rain and dew, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:65 Bless the Lord, every wind, praise and glorify him for ever! 



Dan 3:66 Bless the Lord, fire and heat, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:67 Bless the Lord, cold and warmth, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:68 Bless the Lord, dew and snow-storm, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:69 Bless the Lord, frost and cold, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:70 Bless the Lord, ice and snow, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:71 Bless the Lord, nights and days, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:72 Bless the Lord, light and darkness, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:73 Bless the Lord, lightning and cloud, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:74 Let the earth bless the Lord: praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:75 Bless the Lord, mountains and hills, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:76 Bless the Lord, every plant that grows, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:77 Bless the Lord, springs of water, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:78 Bless the Lord, seas and rivers, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:79 Bless the Lord, whales, and everything that moves in the waters, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:80 Bless the Lord, every kind of bird, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:81 Bless the Lord, all animals wild and tame, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:82 Bless the Lord, all the human race: praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:83 Bless the Lord, O Israel, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:84 Bless the Lord, priests, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:85 Bless the Lord, his servants, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:86 Bless the Lord, spirits and souls of the upright, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:87 Bless the Lord, faithful, humble-hearted people, praise and glorify him for ever! 

Dan 3:88 Hananiah, Azariah and Mishael, bless the Lord, praise and glorify him for ever!-For he has rescued us 

from the Underworld, he has saved us from the hand of Death, he has snatched us from the burning fiery 
furnace, he has drawn us from the heart of the flame! 

Dan 3:89 Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, for his love is everlasting. 

Dan 3:90 Bless the Lord, the God of gods, all who fear him, give praise and thanks to him, for his love is 
everlasting! 

Dan 3:91 King Nebuchadnezzar sprang to his feet in amazement. He said to his advisers, “Did we not have 
these three men thrown bound into the fire?”. They answered the king, “Certainly, Your Majesty'. 

Dan 3:92 “But”, he went on, “I can see four men walking free in the heart of the fire and quite unharmed! And the 
fourth looks like a child of the gods!”. 

Dan 3:93 Nebuchadnezzar approached the mouth of the burning fiery furnace and said, “Shadrach, Meshach 
and Abed-Nego, servants of God Most High, come out, come here!”. And from the heart of the fire out came 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego. 

Dan 3:94 The satraps, magistrates, governors, and advisers of the king crowded round the three men to 
examine them: the fire had had no effect on their bodies: not a hair of their heads had been singed, their cloaks 
were not scorched, no smell of burning hung about them. Nebuchadnezzar said, 

Dan 3:95 “Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego: he has sent his angel to rescue his 
servants who, putting their trust in him, defied the order of the king, and preferred to forfeit their bodies rather 
than serve or worship any god but their God. 

Dan 3:96 I therefore decree as follows, ‘Peoples, nations, and languages! Let any of you speak disrespectfully 
of the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego, and I shall have him torn limb from limb and his house turned 
into a dunghill; for there is no other god who can save like this’”. 

Dan 3:97 The king then showered favours on Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-Nego in the province of Babylon. 
Dan 3:98 “King Nebuchadnezzar, to all peoples, nations and languages dwelling throughout the world: may you 
prosper more and more! 

Dan 3:99 “It is my pleasure to make known the signs and wonders with which the Most High God has favoured 
me. 

Dan 3:100 How great his signs, how mighty his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, his empire 
endures age after age!”. 

Dan 4:1 “I, Nebuchadnezzar, was living comfortably in my house, prosperously in my palace. 

Dan 4:2 I had a dream; it appalled me. Dread assailed me as I lay in bed; the visions that passed through my 
head tormented me. 

Dan 4:3 So I decreed that all the sages of Babylon be summoned to explain to me what the dream meant. 

Dan 4:4 Magicians, soothsayers, Chaldaeans and exorcists came, and I told them what I had dreamt, but they 
could not interpret it for me. 

Dan 4:5 Daniel, renamed Belteshazzar after my own god, and in whom the spirit of the holy gods resides, then 
came into my presence. I told him my dream: 



Dan 4:6 “‘Belteshazzar, chief of magicians’, I said, ‘I know that the spirit of the holy gods resides in you and 
that no mystery puts you at a loss. This is the dream I have had; tell me what it means. 

Dan 4:7 “‘The visions that passed through my head as I lay in bed were these: I saw a tree in the middle of the 
world; it was very tall. 

Dan 4:8 The tree grew taller and stronger, until its top reached the sky and it could be seen from the very ends 
of the earth. 

Dan 4:9 Its foliage was beautiful, its fruit abundant, in it was food for all. For the wild animals it provided shade, 
the birds of heaven nested in its branches, all living creatures found their food on it. 

Dan 4:10 “‘I watched the visions passing through my head as I lay in bed: Next, a Watchful One, a holy one, 
came down from heaven. 

Dan 4:1 1 At the top of his voice he shouted: Cut the tree down, lop off its branches, strip off its leaves, throw 
away its fruit; let the animals flee from its shelter and the birds from its branches. 

Dan 4:12 But leave the stump with its roots in the ground, bound with hoops of iron and bronze, in the grass of 
the countryside. Let it be drenched by the dew of heaven and have its lot with the animals, eating grass! 

Dan 4:13 Let it cease to have a human heart, and be given the heart of a beast, and seven times shall pass 
over him! 

Dan 4:14 Such is the sentence proclaimed by the Watchers, the verdict announced by the holy ones- so that 
every living thing may learn that the Most High rules over human sovereignty; he confers it on whom he pleases, 
and raises the lowest of humankind. 

Dan 4:15 “‘This was the dream I had-l, Nebuchadnezzar the king. Now it is for you, Belteshazzar, to pronounce 
on its meaning, since not one of the sages in my kingdom has been able to interpret it for me; you, however, can 
do so, since the spirit of the holy gods resides in you’”. 

Dan 4:16 Daniel, known as Belteshazzar, was confused for a time and upset. The king said, “Belteshazzar, do 
not be upset at the dream and its meaning”. Belteshazzar answered, “My lord, may the dream apply to those who 
hate you, and its meaning to your foes! 

Dan 4:17 The tree you saw, so large and strong and tall that it reached the sky and could be seen throughout 
the world, 

Dan 4:18 the tree with beautiful foliage and abundant fruit, with food for all in it, providing shade for the wild 
animals, with the birds of heaven nesting in its branches: 

Dan 4:19 that tree is yourself, Your Majesty, for you have grown great and strong; your stature is now so great 
that it reaches the sky, and your empire extends to the ends of the earth. 

Dan 4:20 “And the Watchful One seen by the king, the holy one coming down from heaven and saying, ‘Cut the 
tree down and destroy it, but leave stump and roots in the ground, bound with hoops of iron and bronze in the 
grass of the countryside; let it be drenched by the dew and have its lot with the wild animals until seven times 
have passed over it’: 

Dan 4:21 the meaning of this, Your Majesty, the verdict of the Most High passed on my lord the king, is this: 

Dan 4:22 You will be driven from human society and will make your home with the wild animals, you will feed on 
grass, as oxen do, you will be drenched by the dew of heaven; seven times will pass over you until you have 
learnt that the Most High rules over human sovereignty and confers it on whom he pleases. 

Dan 4:23 “And the order, ‘Leave the stump and roots of the tree’, means that your kingdom will be kept for you 
until you come to understand that Heaven rules all. 

Dan 4:24 May it please the king to accept my advice: by upright actions break with your sins, break with your 
crimes by showing mercy to the poor, and so live long and peacefully”. 

Dan 4:25 This all happened to King Nebuchadnezzar. 

Dan 4:26 At the end of twelve months, while strolling on the roof of the royal palace in Babylon, 

Dan 4:27 the king was saying, “Great Babylon! Was it not built by me as a royal residence, by the force of my 
might and for the majesty of my glory?”. 

Dan 4:28 The words were not out of his mouth when a voice came down from heaven: “Of you, King 
Nebuchadnezzar, it is decreed: the empire has been taken from you, 

Dan 4:29 you will be driven from human society and will make your home with the wild animals; you will feed on 
grass, as oxen do, and seven times will pass over you until you have learnt that the Most High rules over human 
sovereignty and gives it to whom he pleases”. 

Dan 4:30 The words were immediately fulfilled: Nebuchadnezzar was driven from human society and ate grass 
as oxen do; he was drenched by the dew of heaven; his hair grew like an eagle’s feathers, and his nails became 
like a bird’s talons. 

Dan 4:31 “When the time was over, I, Nebuchad- nezzar, raised my eyes to heaven: my reason returned. And I 
blessed the Most High, praising and glorifying him who lives for ever, for his empire is an everlasting empire, his 
kingship endures, age after age. 

Dan 4:32 All who dwell on earth count for nothing; as he thinks fit, he disposes the army of heaven and those 



who dwell on earth. No one can arrest his hand or ask him, ‘What have you done?’. 

Dan 4:33 “At that moment my reason returned and, for the honour of my royal state, my glory and splendour 
returned too. My counsellors and noblemen acclaimed me; I was restored to my throne, and to my past 
greatness even more was added. 

Dan 4:34 And now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise, extol and glorify the King of heaven, all of whose deeds are true, 
all of whose ways are right, and who can humble those who walk in pride”. 

Dan 5:1 King Belshazzar gave a great banquet for his noblemen, a thousand of them, and, in the presence of 
this thousand, he drank his wine. 

Dan 5:2 Having tasted the wine, Belshazzar gave orders for the gold and silver vessels to be brought which his 
father Nebuchadnezzar had taken from the sanctuary in Jerusalem, so that the king, his noblemen, his wives 
and the women who sang for him could drink out of them. 

Dan 5:3 The gold and silver vessels taken from the sanctuary of the Temple of God in Jerusalem were brought 
in, and the king, his noblemen, his wives and the women who sang for him drank out of them. 

Dan 5:4 They drank their wine and praised their idols of gold and silver, of bronze and iron, of wood and stone. 
Dan 5:5 Suddenly, the fingers of a human hand appeared and began to write on the plaster of the palace wall, 
directly behind the lamp-stand; and the king could see the hand as it wrote. 

Dan 5:6 The king turned pale with alarm: his hip-joints went slack and his knees began to knock. 

Dan 5:7 He shouted for his soothsayers, Chaldaeans, and exorcists. And the king said to the Babylonian sages, 
“Anyone who can read this writing and tell me what it means shall be dressed in purple, and have a chain of gold 
put round his neck, and be one of the three men who govern the kingdom”. 

Dan 5:8 The king’s sages all crowded forward, but they could neither read the writing nor explain to the king 
what it meant. 

Dan 5:9 Greatly alarmed, King Belshazzar turned even paler, and his noblemen were equally disturbed. 

Dan 5:10 Then the queen, attracted by the noise made by the king and his noblemen, came into the banqueting 
hall. “May Your Majesty live for ever!”. said the queen. “Do not be alarmed, do not look so pale. 

Dan 5:1 1 In your kingdom there is a man in whom lives the spirit of the holy gods. In your father’s days he was 
known for a perception, intelligence and wisdom comparable to that of the gods. King Nebuchadnezzar, your 
father, made him head of the magicians, soothsayers, Chaldaeans and exorcists. 

Dan 5:12 Since this man Daniel, whom the king had renamed Belteshazzar, is filled with such a marvellous 
spirit and such knowledge and intelligence in interpreting dreams, solving enigmas and unravelling difficult 
problems, send for him; he will be able to tell you what this means”. 

Dan 5:13 Daniel was brought into the king’s presence; the king said to Daniel, “Are you the Daniel who was one 
of the Judaean exiles brought by my father the king from Judah? 

Dan 5:14 lam told that the spirit of the gods lives in you, and that you are known for your perception, 
intelligence and marvellous wisdom. 

Dan 5:15 The sages and soothsayers have already been brought to me to read this writing and tell me what it 
means, but they have been unable to reveal its meaning. 

Dan 5:16 lam told that you are able to give interpretations and to unravel difficult problems, so if you can read 
the writing and tell me what it means, you shall be dressed in purple, and have a chain of gold put round your 
neck, and be one of the three men who govern the kingdom”. 

Dan 5:17 Then Daniel spoke up in the presence of the king. “Keep your gifts for yourself”, he said, “and give your 
rewards to others! I can certainly read the writing to the king and tell him what it means. 

Dan 5:18 Your Majesty, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar your father sovereignty, greatness, majesty 
and glory. 

Dan 5:19 He made him so great that all peoples, nations and languages shook with dread before him: he killed 
whom he pleased, spared whom he pleased, promoted whom he pleased, degraded whom he pleased. 

Dan 5:20 But because his heart grew swollen with pride, and his spirit stiff with arrogance, he was deposed from 
his sovereign throne and stripped of his glory. 

Dan 5:21 He was driven from human society, his heart was more like an animal’s than a man's; he lived with the 
wild donkeys; he fed on grass like oxen; his body was drenched by the dew of heaven, until he had learnt that 
the Most High rules over human sovereignty and appoints whom he pleases to rule it. 

Dan 5:22 But you, Belshazzar, who are his son, you have not humbled your heart, in spite of knowing all this. 
Dan 5:23 You have defied the Lord of heaven, you have had the vessels from his Temple brought to you, and 
you, your noblemen, your wives and the women singing for you have drunk your wine out of them. You have 
praised gods of gold and silver, of bronze and iron, of wood and stone, which can neither see, hear nor 
understand; but you have given no glory to the God in whose hands are your breath itself and all your fortunes. 
Dan 5:24 That is why he has sent the hand which has written these words. 

Dan 5:25 The writing reads: mene, mene, teqel and parsin. 

Dan 5:26 The meaning of the words is this: mene: God has measured your sovereignty and put an end to it; 



Dan 5:27 teqel: you have been weighed in the balance and found wanting; 

Dan 5:28 parsin: your kingdom has been divided and given to the Medes and the Persians”. 

Dan 5:29 At Belshazzar’s order Daniel was dressed in purple, a chain of gold was put round his neck and he 
was proclaimed as one of the three men who governed the kingdom. 

Dan 5:30 That same night, the Chaldaean king Belshazzar was murdered, 

Dan 6:1 and Darius the Mede received the kingdom, at the age of sixty-two. 

Dan 6:2 It pleased Darius to appoint a hundred and twenty satraps over his kingdom for the various parts, 

Dan 6:3 and over them three presidents — of whom Daniel was one — to whom the satraps were to be 
responsible. This was to safeguard the king’s interests. 

Dan 6:4 This Daniel, by virtue of the marvellous spirit residing in him, was so evidently superior to the other 
presidents and satraps that the king considered appointing him to rule the whole kingdom. 

Dan 6:5 The presidents and satraps, in consequence, started hunting for some affair of state by which they 
could discredit Daniel; but they could find nothing to his discredit, and no case of negligence; he was so 
punctilious that they could not find a single instance of maladministration or neglect. 

Dan 6:6 These men then thought, “We shall never find a way of discrediting Daniel unless we try something to 
do with the law of his God”. 

Dan 6:7 The presidents and satraps then went in a body to the king. “King Darius”, they said, “live for ever! 

Dan 6:8 We are all agreed, presidents of the realm, magistrates, satraps, councillors and governors, that the 
king should issue an edict enforcing the following regulation: Whoëver within the next thirty days prays to 
anyone, divine or human, other than to yourself, Your Majesty, is to be thrown into the lions’ den. 

Dan 6:9 Your Majesty, ratify the edict at once by signing this document, making it unalterable, as befits the law 
of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be revoked”. 

Dan 6:10 King Darius accordingly signed the document embodying the edict. 

Dan 6:1 1 When Daniel heard that the document had been signed, he retired to his house. The windows of his 
upstairs room faced towards Jerusalem. Three times each day, he went down on his knees, praying and giving 
praise to God as he had always done. 

Dan 6:12 These men came along in a body and found Daniel praying and pleading with God. 

Dan 6:13 They then went to the king and reminded him of the royal edict, “Have you not signed an edict 
forbidding anyone for the next thirty days to pray to anyone, divine or human, other than to yourself, Your 
Majesty, on pain of being thrown into the lions’ den?”. “The decision stands”, the king replied, “as befits the law of 
the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be revoked”. 

Dan 6:14 They then said to the king, “Your Majesty, this man Daniel, one of the exiles from Judah, disregards 
both you and the edict which you have signed: he is at his prayers three times each day”. 

Dan 6:15 When the king heard these words he was deeply distressed and determined to save Daniel; he racked 
his brains until sunset to find some way to save him. 

Dan 6:16 But the men kept pressing the king, “Your Majesty, remember that in conformity with the law of the 
Medes and the Persians, no edict or decree can be altered when once issued by the king”. 

Dan 6:17 The king then ordered Daniel to be brought and thrown into the lion pit. The king said to Daniel, “Your 
God, whom you have served so faithfully, will have to save you”. 

Dan 6:18 A stone was then brought and laid over the mouth of the pit; and the king sealed it with his own signet 
and with that of his noblemen, so that there could be no going back on the original decision about Daniel. 

Dan 6:19 The king returned to his palace, spent the night in fasting and refused to receive any of his 
concubines. Sleep eluded him, 

Dan 6:20 and at the first sign of dawn he got up and hurried to the lion pit. 

Dan 6:21 As he approached the pit he called in anguished tones to Daniel, “Daniel, servant of the living God! 

Has your God, whom you serve so faithfully, been able to save you from the lions?”. 

Dan 6:22 Daniel answered the king, “May Your Majesty live for ever! 

Dan 6:23 My God sent his angel who sealed the lions’ jaws; they did me no harm, since in his sight I am 
blameless; neither have I ever done you any wrong, Your Majesty”. 

Dan 6:24 The king was overjoyed and ordered Daniel to be released from the pit. Daniel was released from the 
pit and found to be quite unhurt, because he had trusted in his God. 

Dan 6:25 The king then sent for the men who had accused Daniel and had them thrown into the lion pit, and 
their wives and children too; and before they reached the floor of the pit the lions had seized them and crushed 
their bones to pieces. 

Dan 6:26 King Darius then wrote to all nations, peoples and languages dwelling throughout the world: “May you 
prosper more and more! 

Dan 6:27 This is my decree: Throughout every dominion of my realm, let all tremble with fear before the God of 
Daniel: He is the living God, he endures for ever, his kingdom will never be destroyed and his empire never 
come to an end. 



Dan 6:28 He saves, sets free, and works signs and wonders in the heavens and on earth; he has saved Daniel 
from the power of the lions”. 

Dan 6:29 This Daniel flourished in the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian. 

Dan 7:1 In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, Daniel had a dream and visions that passed through his 
head as he lay in bed. He wrote the dream down, and this is how the narrative began: 

Dan 7:2 Daniel said, “I have been seeing visions in the night. I saw that the four winds of heaven were stirring up 
the Great Sea; 

Dan 7:3 four great beasts emerged from the sea, each different from the others. 

Dan 7:4 The first was like a lion with eagle’s wings and, as I looked, its wings were torn off, and it was lifted off 
the ground and set standing on its feet like a human; and it was given a human heart. 

Dan 7:5 And there before me was a second beast, like a bear, rearing up on one side, with three ribs in its 
mouth, between its teeth. ‘Up!’. came the command. ‘Eat quantities of flesh!’. 

Dan 7:6 After this I looked; and there before me was another beast, like a leopard, and with four bird’s wings on 
its flanks; it had four heads and was granted authority. 

Dan 7:7 Next, in the visions of the night, I saw another vision: there before me was a fourth beast, fearful, 
terrifying, very strong; it had great iron teeth, and it ate its victims, crushed them, and trampled their remains 
underfoot. It was different from the previous beasts and had ten horns. 

Dan 7:8 “While I was looking at these horns, I saw another horn sprouting among them, a little one; three of the 
original horns were pulled out by the roots to make way for it; and in this horn I saw eyes like human eyes, and a 
mouth full of boasting. 

Dan 7:9 While I was watching, thrones were set in place and one most venerable took his seat. His robe was 
white as snow, the hair of his head as pure as wool. His throne was a blaze of flames, its wheels were a burning 
fire. 

Dan 7:10 A stream of fire poured out, issuing from his presence. A thousand thousand waited on him, ten 
thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The court was in session and the books lay open. 

Dan 7:1 1 “I went on watching: then, because of the noise made by the boastings of the horn, as I watched, the 
beast was put to death, and its body destroyed and committed to the flames. 

Dan 7:12 The other beasts were deprived of their empire, but received a lease of life for a season and a time. 
Dan 7:13 I was gazing into the visions of the night, when I saw, coming on the clouds of heaven, as it were a 
son of man. He came to the One most venerable and was led into his presence. 

Dan 7:14 On him was conferred rule, honour and kingship, and all peoples, nations and languages became his 
servants. His rule is an everlasting rule which will never pass away, and his kingship will never come to an end. 
Dan 7:15 “I, Daniel, was deeply disturbed and the visions that passed through my head alarmed me. 

Dan 7:16 So I approached one of those who were standing by and asked him about all this. And in reply he 
revealed to me what these things meant. 

Dan 7:17 ‘These four great beasts are four kings who will rise up from the earth. 

Dan 7:18 Those who receive royal power are the holy ones of the Most High, and kingship will be theirs for ever, 

for ever and ever’. 

Dan 7:19 Then I asked about the fourth beast, different from all the rest, very terrifying, with iron teeth and 
bronze claws; it ate its victims, crushed them, and trampled their remains underfoot; 

Dan 7:20 and about the ten horns on its head — and why the other horn sprouted and the three original horns 
fell, and why this horn had eyes and a mouth full of boasting, and why it looked more impressive than its fellows. 
Dan 7:21 This was the horn I had watched making war on the holy ones and proving the stronger, 

Dan 7:22 until the coming of the One most venerable who gave judgement in favour of the holy ones of the Most 

High, when the time came for the holy ones to assume kingship. 

Dan 7:23 This is what he said: ‘The fourth beast is to be a fourth kingdom on earth, different from all other 
kingdoms. It will devour the whole world, trample it underfoot and crush it. 

Dan 7:24 As for the ten horns: from this kingdom will rise ten kings, and another after them; this one will be 
different from the previous ones and will bring down three kings; 

Dan 7:25 he will insult the Most High, and torment the holy ones of the Most High. He will plan to alter the 
seasons and the Law, and the Saints will be handed over to him for a time, two times, and half a time. 

Dan 7:26 But the court will sit, and he will be stripped of his royal authority which will be finally destroyed and 
reduced to nothing. 

Dan 7:27 And kingship and rule and the splendours of all the kingdoms under heaven will be given to the people 
of the holy ones of the Most High, whose royal power is an eternal power, whom every empire will serve and 
obey’. 

Dan 7:28 “Here the narrative ends. “I, Daniel, was greatly disturbed in mind, and I grew pale; but I kept these 
things to myself”. 

Dan 8:1 In the third year of King Belshazzar a vision appeared to me, Daniel, after the one that had originally 



appeared to me. 

Dan 8:2 I gazed at the vision, and as I gazed I found myself in Susa, the citadel in the province of Elam; gazing 
at the vision, I found myself at the Ulai Gate. 

Dan 8:3 I raised my eyes to look, and I saw a ram standing in front of the gate. It had two horns; both were tall, 
but one taller than the other, and the one that rose the higher was the second. 

Dan 8:4 I saw the ram butting westwards, northwards and southwards. No animal could stand up to it, nothing 
could escape its power. It did as it pleased and became strong. 

Dan 8:5 This is what I observed: a he-goat from the west, encroaching over the entire surface of the world 
though never touching the ground, and between its eyes the goat had one majestic horn. 

Dan 8:6 It advanced on the two-horned ram, which I had seen standing in front of the gate, and charged at it in 
the full force of its fury. 

Dan 8:7 I saw it reach the ram; it was enraged with the ram and struck it, breaking both its horns, so that the 
ram was not strong enough to hold its ground; it threw it to the ground and trampled it underfoot; no one was 
there to rescue the ram. 

Dan 8:8 The he-goat then grew more powerful than ever; but at the height of its strength the great horn 
snapped, and in its place sprouted four majestic horns, pointing to the four winds of heaven. 

Dan 8:9 From one of these, the small one, sprang a horn which grew to great size towards south and east and 
towards the Land of Splendour. 

Dan 8:10 It grew right up to the armies of heaven and flung armies and stars to the ground, and trampled them 
underfoot. 

Dan 8:11 It even challenged the power of the Prince of the army; it abolished the perpetual sacrifice and 
overthrew the foundation of his sanctuary, 

Dan 8:12 and the army too; over the sacrifice it installed iniquity and flung truth to the ground; the horn was 
active and successful. 

Dan 8:13 I heard a holy one speaking, and another holy one say to the speaker, “How long is this vision to be — 
of perpetual sacrifice, of horrifying iniquity, of sanctuary and army trampled underfoot?”. 

Dan 8:14 The first replied, “Until two thousand three hundred evenings and mornings have gone by: then the 
sanctuary will have its rights restored”. 

Dan 8:15 As I, Daniel, gazed at the vision and tried to understand it, I saw someöne standing in front of me who 
looked like a man. 

Dan 8:16 I heard a human voice cry over the Ulai, “Gabriel, tell him the meaning of the vision!”. 

Dan 8:17 He approached the place where I was standing; as he approached, I was seized with terror and fell 
prostrate on the ground. “Son of man”, he said to me, “understand this: the vision shows the time of the End”. 

Dan 8:18 He was still speaking, when I fainted, face downwards on the ground. He touched me, however, and 
raised me to my feet. 

Dan 8:19 “Come”, he said, “I shall tell you what is going to happen when the Retribution is over, about the final 
times. 

Dan 8:20 As for the ram which you saw, its two horns are the kings of Media and of Persia. 

Dan 8:21 The hairy he-goat is the king of Greece, the large horn between its eyes is the first king. 

Dan 8:22 The horn which snapped and the four horns which sprouted in its place are four kingdoms rising from 
his nation but not having his strength. 

Dan 8:23 “And at the end of their reign, when the measure of their sins is full, a king will arise, a proud-faced, 
ingenious-minded man. 

Dan 8:24 His power will grow greater and greater, though not through any power of his own; he will plot 
incredible schemes, he will succeed in whatever he undertakes, he will destroy powerful men and the holy ones, 
God’s people. 

Dan 8:25 Such will be his resourcefulness of mind that all his treacherous activities will succeed. He will grow 
arrogant of heart and destroy many people by taking them unawares. He will challenge the power of the Prince 
of princes but, without any human intervention, he will be broken. 

Dan 8:26 The vision of the evenings and the mornings which has been revealed is true, but you must keep the 
vision secret, for there are still many days to go”. 

Dan 8:27 At this I, Daniel, lost consciousness; I was ill for several days. Then I got up to discharge my duties in 
the king’s service, keeping the vision a secret and still not understanding what it meant. 

Dan 9:1 It was the first year of Darius son of Artaxerxes, a Mede by race who assumed the throne of Chaldaea. 
Dan 9:2 In the first year of his reign I, Daniel, was studying the scriptures, counting over the number of years — 
as revealed by Yahweh to the prophet Jeremiah — that were to pass before the desolation of Jerusalem would 
come to an end, namely seventy years. 

Dan 9:3 I turned my face to the Lord God begging for time to pray and to plead, with fasting, sackcloth and 
ashes. 



Dan 9:4 I pleaded with Yahweh my God and made this confession: “O my Lord, God great and to be feared, you 
keep the covenant and show faithful love towards those who love you and who observe your commandments: 
Dan 9:5 we have sinned, we have done wrong, we have acted wickedly, we have betrayed your 
commandments and rulings and turned away from them. 

Dan 9:6 We have not listened to your servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our kings, our chief 
men, our ancestors and all people of the country. 

Dan 9:7 Saving justice, Lord, is yours; we have only the look of shame we wear today, we, the people of Judah, 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the whole of Israel, near and far away, in every country to which you have 
dispersed us because of the treachery we have committed against you. 

Dan 9:8 To us, our kings, our chief men and our ancestors, belongs the look of shame, O Yahweh, since we 
have sinned against you. 

Dan 9:9 And it is for the Lord our God to have mercy and to pardon, since we have betrayed him, 

Dan 9:10 and have not listened to the voice of Yahweh our God nor followed the laws he has given us through 
his servants the prophets. 

Dan 9:1 1 The whole of Israel has flouted your Law and turned away, unwilling to listen to your voice; and the 
curse and imprecation written in the Law of Moses, the servant of God, have come pouring down on us, because 
we have sinned against him. 

Dan 9:12 He has carried out the threats which he made against us and the chief men who governed us — that 
he would bring so great a disaster down on us that the fate of Jerusalem would find no parallel under all heaven. 
Dan 9:13 And now, as written in the Law of Moses, this whole calamity has befallen us; even so, we have not 
appeased Yahweh our God by renouncing our crimes and learning your truth. 

Dan 9:14 Yahweh has watched for the right moment to bring disaster on us, since Yahweh our God is just in all 
his dealings with us, and we have not listened to his voice. 

Dan 9:15 And now, Lord our God, who by your mighty hand brought us out of Egypt — the renown you won then 
endures to this day — we have sinned, we have done wrong. 

Dan 9:16 Lord, by all your acts of saving justice, turn away your anger and your fury from Jerusalem, your city, 
your holy mountain, for as a result of our sins and the crimes of our ancestors, Jerusalem and your people are 
objects of scorn to all who surround us. 

Dan 9:17 And now, our God, listen to the prayer and pleading of your servant. For your own sake, Lord, let your 
face smile again on your desolate sanctuary. 

Dan 9:18 Listen, my God, listen to us; open your eyes and look at our plight and at the city that bears your 
name. Relying not on our upright deeds but on your great mercy, we pour out our plea to you. 

Dan 9:19 Listen, Lord! Forgive, Lord! Hear, Lord, and act! For your own sake, my God, do not delay — since 
your city and your people alike bear your name”. 

Dan 9:20 I was still speaking, still at prayer, confessing my own sins and the sins of my people Israel, and 
placing my plea before Yahweh my God for the holy mountain of my God, 

Dan 9:21 still speaking, still at prayer, when Gabriel, the being I had originally seen in vision, swooped on me in 
full flight at the hour of the evening sacrifice. 

Dan 9:22 He came, he spoke, he said to me, “Now, Daniel; I have come down to teach you how to understand. 
Dan 9:23 When your pleading began, a word was uttered, and I have come to tell you. You are a man specially 
chosen. Grasp the meaning of the word, understand the vision: 

Dan 9:24 “Seventy weeks are decreed for your people and your holy city, for putting an end to transgression, for 
placing the seal on sin, for expiating crime, for introducing everlasting uprightness for setting the seal on vision 
and on prophecy, for anointing the holy of holies. 

Dan 9:25 Know this, then, and understand: From the time there went out this message: ‘Return and rebuild 
Jerusalem’ to the coming of an Anointed Prince, seven weeks and sixty-two weeks, with squares and ramparts 
restored and rebuilt, but in a time of trouble. 

Dan 9:26 And after the sixty-two weeks an Anointed One put to death without his … city and sanctuary ruined 
by a prince who is to come. The end of that prince will be catastrophe and, until the end, there will be war and all 
the devastation decreed. 

Dan 9:27 He will strike a firm alliance with many people for the space of a week; and for the space of one half- 
week he will put a stop to sacrifice and oblation, and on the wing of the Temple will be the appalling abomination 
until the end, until the doom assigned to the devastator”. 

Dan 10:1 In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a revelation was made to Daniel known as Belteshazzar, a 
true revelation of a great conflict. He grasped the meaning of the revelation; what it meant was disclosed to him 
in a vision. 

Dan 10:2 At that time, I, Daniel, was doing a three-week penance; 

Dan 1 0:3 I ate no agreeable food, touched no meat or wine, and did not anoint myself, until these three weeks 
were over. 



Dan 10:4 On the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I stood on the bank of that great river, the Tigris, 

Dan 10:5 I raised my eyes to look about me, and this is what I saw: A man dressed in linen, with a belt of pure 
gold round his waist: 

Dan 10:6 his body was like beryl, his face looked like lightning, his eyes were like fiery torches, his arms and his 
face had the gleam of burnished bronze, the sound of his voice was like the roar of a multitude. 

Dan 10:7 I, Daniel, alone saw the apparition; the men who were with me did not see the vision, but so great a 
trembling overtook them that they fled to hide. 

Dan 10:8 I was left alone, gazing on this great vision; I was powerless, my appearance was changed and 
contorted; my strength deserted me. 

Dan 10:9 I heard a voice speaking, and at the sound of the voice I fell fainting, face downwards on the ground. 
Dan 10:10 I felt a hand touching me, setting my knees and my hands trembling. 

Dan 10:1 1 He said, “Daniel, you are a man specially chosen; understand the words that I am about to say; stand 
up; I have been sent to you now”. He said this, and I stood up trembling. 

Dan 10:12 He then said, “Daniel, do not be afraid: from that first day when, the better to understand, you 
resolved to mortify yourself before God, your words have been heard; and your words are the reason why I have 
come. 

Dan 10:13 The Prince of the kingdom of Persia has been resisting me for twenty-one days, but Michael, one of 
the Chief Princes, came to my assistance. I have left him confronting the kings of Persia 
Dan 10:14 and have come to tell you what will happen to your people in the final days. For here is a new vision 
about those days”. 

Dan 10:15 When he had said these things to me, I prostrated myself on the ground, without saying a word; 

Dan 10:16 then someöne looking like a man touched my lips. I opened my mouth to speak, and I said to the 
person standing in front of me, “My lord, anguish overcomes me at this vision, and my strength deserts me. 

Dan 10:17 How can your servant speak to my lord now that I have no strength left and my breath fails me?”. 

Dan 10:18 Once again, the person like a man touched me; he gave me strength. 

Dan 10:19 “Do not be afraid”, he said, “you are a man specially chosen; peace be with you; play the man, be 
strong!”. And as he spoke to me I felt strong again and said, “Let my lord speak, you have given me strength”. 

Dan 10:20 He then said, “Do you know why I have come to you? 

Dan 10:21 It is to tell you what is written in the Book of Truth. I must go back to fight the Prince of Persia; when I 
have overcome him, the Prince of Javan will come next. In all this, there is no one to lend me support except 
Michael your Prince, 

Dan 11:1 on whom I rely to give me support and to reinforce me. 

Dan 1 1 :2 And now I shall tell you the truth about these things. “Three more kings are going to rise in Persia; a 
fourth will come and be richer than all the others, and when, thanks to his wealth, he has grown powerful, he will 
make war on all the kingdoms of Greece. 

Dan 1 1 :3 A mighty king will rise and govern a vast empire and do whatever he pleases. 

Dan 1 1 :4 But once he has come to power, his empire will be broken up and parcelled out to the four winds of 
heaven, though not to his descendants: it will not be ruled as he ruled it, for his sovereignty will be uprooted and 
will pass to others than his own descendants. 

Dan 1 1 :5 “The king of the south will grow powerful, but one of his princes will grow more powerful still, with an 
empire greater than his own. 

Dan 1 1 :6 Some years later, these will conclude a treaty and, to ratify the agreement, the daughter of the king of 
the south will go to the king of the north. Her arm will not, however, retain its strength, nor his posterity endure: 
she will be handed over, she, her escorts and her child, and he who has had authority over her. In due time 
Dan 11:7 a sprig from her roots will rise in his place, will march on the defences, force the stronghold of the king 
of the north, and succeed in overcoming them. 

Dan 11:8 He will even carry off all their gods, their statues, their precious gold and silver vessels as booty to 
Egypt. For some years he will leave the king of the north in peace, 

Dan 1 1 :9 but the latter will invade the kingdom of the king of the south, then retire to his own country. 

Dan 11:10 His sons will next be on the march, mustering a host of powerful forces; and he will advance, deploy, 
break through and march on the southern stronghold once again. 

Dan 11:11 The king of the south will fly into a rage and set out to give battle to the king of the north, who will 
have an immense army on his side, but this army will be defeated by him. 

Dan 11:12 The army will be annihilated; he will be triumphant; he will overthrow tens of thousands; yet he will 
have no enduring strength. 

Dan 11:13 The king of the north will come back, having recruited an even larger army than before, and finally, 
after some years, he will advance a second time with a great army and plentiful supplies. 

Dan 11:14 At that time, many will take up arms against the king of the south, and the more violent of your own 
people will rebel in the hope of realising the vision; but they will fail. 



Dan 11:15 The king of the north will then come and throw up siege-works to capture a strongly fortified city. The 
forces of the south will not stand their ground; the pick of the people will not be strong enough to resist. 

Dan 11:16 The invader will do as he pleases, no one will be able to resist him: he will take his stand in the Land 
of Splendour, destruction in his hands. 

Dan 11:17 He will set about conquering his entire kingdom, but will then make a treaty with him and, to 
overthrow the kingdom, give him a woman’s hand; but this will not last or be to his advantage. 

Dan 11:18 He will next turn to the coasts and islands and conquer many of them, but a magistrate will put a stop 
to his outrages in such a way that he will be unable to repay outrage for outrage. 

Dan 11:19 “He will then turn on the strongholds of his own country, but will stumble, fall, and never be seen 
again. 

Dan 1 1 :20 In his place there will rise a man who will send an extortioner to despoil the royal splendour; in a few 
days he will be shattered, though neither publicly nor in battle. 

Dan 1 1 :21 “In his place will rise a wretch: royal honours will not be given to him, but rather he will insinuate 
himself into them at his pleasure and will gain possession of the kingdom by intrigue. 

Dan 1 1 :22 Armies will be utterly routed and crushed by him, the Prince of the covenant too. 

Dan 1 1 :23 Through his alliances he will act treacherously and, despite the smallness of his following, grow ever 
stronger. 

Dan 1 1 :24 At his pleasure, he will invade rich provinces, acting as his fathers or his fathers’ fathers never acted, 
distributing among them plunder, spoil and wealth, plotting his stratagems against the fortresses — for a time. 

Dan 1 1 :25 “He will summon up his might and courage against the king of the south with a great army. The king 
of the south will march to war with a huge and powerful army but will not succeed, since he will be outwitted by 
trickery. 

Dan 1 1 :26 Those who shared his food will ruin him; his army will be swept away, many will fall in the slaughter. 
Dan 1 1 :27 “The two kings, seated at one table, hearts bent on evil, will tell their lies; but they will not have their 
way, for the appointed time is still to come. 

Dan 1 1 :28 Then the wretch will return greatly enriched to his own country, his heart set against the holy 
covenant; he will take action and then return to his own country. 

Dan 1 1 :29 In due time, he will make his way southwards again, but this time the outcome will not be as before. 
Dan 1 1 :30 The ships of the Kittim will oppose him, and he will be worsted. He will retire and take furious action 
against the holy covenant and, as before, will favour those who forsake that holy covenant. 

Dan 1 1 :31 “Forces of his will come and profane the Citadel-Sanctuary; they will abolish the perpetual sacrifice 
and install the appalling abomination there. 

Dan 1 1 :32 Those who break the covenant he will seduce by his blandishments, but the people who know their 
God will stand firm and take action. 

Dan 1 1 :33 Those of the people who are wise leaders will instruct many; for some days, however, they will 
stumble from sword and flame, captivity and pillage. 

Dan 1 1 :34 And thus stumbling, little help will they receive, though many will be scheming in their support. 

Dan 1 1 :35 Of the wise leaders some will stumble, and so a number of them will be purged, purified and made 
clean — until the time of the End, for the appointed time is still to come. 

Dan 1 1 :36 “The king will do as he pleases, growing more and more arrogant, considering himself greater than 
all the gods; he will utter incredible blasphemies against the God of gods, and he will thrive until the wrath 
reaches bursting point; for what has been decreed will certainly be fulfilled. 

Dan 1 1 :37 Heedless of his fathers’ gods, heedless of the god whom women love, heedless of any god 
whatever, he will consider himself greatest of all. 

Dan 1 1 :38 Instead of them, he will honour the god of fortresses, will honour a god unknown to his ancestors 
with gold and silver, precious stones and valuable presents. 

Dan 1 1 :39 He will use the people of an alien god to defend the fortresses; he will confer great honours on those 
whom he acknowledges, by giving them wide authority and by parcelling the country out for rent. 

Dan 1 1 :40 “When the time comes for the End, the king of the south will try conclusions with him; but the king of 
the north will come storming down on him with chariots, cavalry, and a large fleet. He will invade countries, 
overrun them and drive on. 

Dan 1 1 :41 He will invade the Land of Splendour, and many will fall; but Edom, Moab, and what remains of the 
sons of Ammon will escape him. 

Dan 1 1 :42 “He will reach out to attack countries: Egypt will not escape him. 

Dan 1 1 :43 The gold and silver treasures and all the valuables of Egypt will lie in his power. Libyans and 
Cushites will be at his feet: 

Dan 1 1 :44 but reports coming from the East and the north will worry him, and in great fury he will set out to bring 
ruin and complete destruction to many. 

Dan 1 1 :45 He will pitch the tents of his royal headquarters between the sea and the mountains of the Holy 



Splendour. Yet he will come to his end — there will be no help for him”. 

Dan 12:1 “At that time Michael will arise — the great Prince, defender of your people. That will be a time of great 
distress, unparalleled since nations first came into existence. When that time comes, your own people will be 
spared — all those whose names are found written in the Book. 

Dan 1 2:2 “Of those who are sleeping in the Land of Dust, many will awaken, some to everlasting life, some to 
shame and everlasting disgrace. 

Dan 1 2:3 Those who are wise will shine as brightly as the expanse of the heavens, and those who have 
instructed many in uprightness, as bright as stars for all eternity. 

Dan 1 2:4 “But you, Daniel, must keep these words secret and keep the book sealed until the time of the End. 
Many will roam about, this way and that, and wickedness will continue to increase”. 

Dan 12:5 I, Daniel, then looked and saw two other people standing, one on the near bank of the river, the other 
on the far. 

Dan 12:6 One of them said to the man dressed in linen who was standing further up the stream, “How long until 
these wonders take place?”. 

Dan 12:7 I heard the man speak who was dressed in linen, standing further up the stream: he raised his right 
hand and his left to heaven and swore by him who lives for ever, “A time and two times, and half a time; and all 
these things will come true, once the crushing of the holy people’s power is over”. 

Dan 12:8 I listened but did not understand. I then said, “My lord, what is to be the outcome?”. 

Dan 1 2:9 “Go, Daniel”, he said. “These words are to remain secret and sealed until the time of the End. 

Dan 12:10 Many will be cleansed, made white and purged; the wicked will persist in doing wrong; the wicked will 
never understand; those who are wise will understand. 

Dan 12:1 1 From the moment that the perpetual sacrifice is abolished and the appalling abomination set up: a 
thousand two hundred and ninety days. 

Dan 12:12 Blessed is he who perseveres and attains a thousand three hundred and thirty-five days. 

Dan 12:13 But you, go away and rest; and you will rise for your reward at the end of time”. 

Dan 13:1 In Babylon there lived a man named Joakim. 

Dan 13:2 He was married to a woman called Susanna daughter of Hilkiah, a woman of great beauty; and she 
was God-fearing, for 

Dan 13:3 her parents were worthy people and had instructed their daughter in the Law of Moses. 

Dan 13:4 Joakim was a very rich man and had a garden by his house; he used to be visited by a considerable 
number of the Jews, since he was held in greater respect than any other man. 

Dan 1 3:5 Two elderly men had been selected from the people, that year, to act as judges. Of such the Lord had 
said, “Wickedness has come to Babylon through the elders and judges posing as guides to the people”. 

Dan 13:6 These men were often at Joakim’s house, and all who were engaged in litigation used to come to 
them. 

Dan 13:7 At midday, when the people had gone away, Susanna would take a walk in her husband’s garden. 

Dan 1 3:8 The two elders, who used to watch her every day as she came in to take her walk, gradually began to 
desire her. 

Dan 13:9 They threw reason aside, making no effort to turn their eyes to Heaven, and forgetting the demands of 
virtue. 

Dan 13:10 Both were inflamed by passion for her, but they hid their desire from each other, 

Dan 13:1 1 for they were ashamed to admit the longing to sleep with her, 

Dan 13:12 but they made sure of watching her every day. 

Dan 13:13 One day, having parted with the words, “Let us go home, then, it is time for the midday meal”, they 
went off in different directions, 

Dan 13:14 only to retrace their steps and find themselves face to face again. Obliged then to explain, they 
admitted their desire and agreed to look for an opportunity of surprising her alone. 

Dan 13:15 So they waited for a favourable moment; and one day Susanna came as usual, accompanied only by 
two young maidservants. The day was hot and she wanted to bathe in the garden. 

Dan 13:16 There was no one about except the two elders, spying on her from their hiding place. 

Dan 13:17 She said to the servants, “Bring me some oil and balsam and shut the garden door while I bathe”. 

Dan 13:18 They did as they were told, shutting the garden door and going back to the house by a side entrance 
to fetch what she had asked for; they knew nothing about the elders, for they had concealed themselves. 

Dan 13:19 Hardly were the maids gone than the two elders sprang up and rushed upon her. 

Dan 13:20 “Look”, they said, “the garden door is shut, no one can see us. We want to have you, so give in and 
let us! 

Dan 13:21 Refuse, and we shall both give evidence that a young man was with you and that this was why you 
sent your maids away”. 

Dan 13:22 Susanna sighed. “I am trapped”, she said, “whatever I do. If I agree, it means death for me; if I resist, I 



cannot get away from you. 

Dan 1 3:23 But I prefer to fall innocent into your power than to sin in the eyes of the Lord”. 

Dan 13:24 She then cried out as loud as she could. The two elders began shouting too, putting the blame on 
her, 

Dan 13:25 and one of them ran to open the garden door. 

Dan 13:26 The household, hearing the shouting in the garden, rushed out by the side entrance to see what had 
happened to her. 

Dan 13:27 Once the elders had told their story, the servants were thoroughly taken aback, since nothing of this 
sort had ever been said of Susanna. 

Dan 1 3:28 Next day a meeting was held at the house of her husband Joakim. The two elders arrived, full of their 
wicked plea against Susanna, to have her put to death. 

Dan 1 3:29 They addressed the company, “Summon Susanna daughter of Hilkiah and wife of Joakim”. She was 
sent for, 

Dan 13:30 and came accompanied by her parents, her children and all her relations. 

Dan 13:31 Susanna was very graceful and beautiful to look at; 

Dan 1 3:32 she was veiled, so the wretches made her unveil in order to feast their eyes on her beauty. 

Dan 13:33 All her own people were weeping, and so were all the others who saw her. 

Dan 13:34 The two elders stood up, with all the people round them, and laid their hands on her head. 

Dan 13:35 Tearfully she turned her eyes to Heaven, her heart confident in God. 

Dan 13:36 The elders then spoke, “While we were walking by ourselves in the garden, this woman arrived with 
two maids. She shut the garden door and then dismissed the servants. 

Dan 1 3:37 A young man, who had been hiding, went over to her and they lay together. 

Dan 13:38 From the end of the garden where we were, we saw this crime taking place and hurried towards 
them. 

Dan 13:39 Though we saw them together, we were unable to catch the man: he was too strong for us; he 
opened the door and took to his heels. 

Dan 13:40 We did, however, catch this woman and ask her who the young man was. 

Dan 1 3:41 She refused to tell us. That is our evidence”. Since they were elders of the people and judges, the 
assembly accepted their word: Susanna was condemned to death. 

Dan 13:42 She cried out as loud as she could, “Eternal God, you know all secrets and everything before it 
happens; 

Dan 13:43 you know that they have given false evidence against me. And now I must die, innocent as I am of 
everything their malice has invented against me!”. 

Dan 13:44 The Lord heard her cry 

Dan 13:45 and, as she was being led away to die, he roused the holy spirit residing in a young boy called Daniel 

Dan 1 3:46 who began to shout, “I am innocent of this woman’s death!”. 

Dan 1 3:47 At this all the people turned to him and asked, “What do you mean by that?”. 

Dan 13:48 Standing in the middle of the crowd, he replied, “Are you so stupid, children of Israel, as to condemn 
a daughter of Israel unheard, and without troubling to find out the truth? 

Dan 13:49 Go back to the scene of the trial: these men have given false evidence against her”. 

Dan 13:50 All the people hurried back, and the elders said to Daniel, “Come and sit with us and tell us what you 

mean, since God has given you the gifts that elders have”. 

Dan 1 3:51 Daniel said, “Keep the men well apart from each other, for I want to question them”. 

Dan 13:52 When the men had been separated, Daniel had one of them brought to him. “You have grown old in 
wickedness”, he said, “and now the sins of your earlier days have overtaken you, 

Dan 13:53 you with your unjust judgements, your condemnation of the innocent, your acquittal of the guilty, 
although the Lord has said, ‘You must not put the innocent and upright to death’. 

Dan 1 3:54 Now then, since you saw her so clearly, tell me what sort of tree you saw them lying under”. He 
replied, “Under an acacia tree”. 

Dan 13:55 Daniel said, “Indeed! Your lie recoils on your own head: the angel of God has already received from 
him your sentence and will cut you in half”. 

Dan 1 3:56 He dismissed the man, ordered the other to be brought and said to him, “Son of Canaan, not of 
Judah, beauty has seduced you, lust has led your heart astray! 

Dan 13:57 This is how you have been behaving with the daughters of Israel, and they have been too frightened 
to resist; but here is a daughter of Judah who could not stomach your wickedness! 

Dan 1 3:58 Now then, tell me what sort of tree you surprised them under”. He replied, “Under an aspen tree”. 

Dan 13:59 Daniel said, “Indeed! Your lie recoils on your own head: the angel of God is waiting with a sword to 
rend you in half, and destroy the pair of you”. 

Dan 13:60 Then the whole assembly shouted, blessing God, the Saviour of those who trust in him. 



Dan 13:61 And they turned on the two elders whom Daniel had convicted of false evidence out of their own 
mouths. 

Dan 13:62 As the Law of Moses prescribes, they were given the same punishment as they had schemed to 
inflict on their neighbour. They were put to death. And thus, that day, an innocent life was saved. 

Dan 13:63 Hilkiah and his wife gave thanks to God for their daughter Susanna, and so did her husband Joakim 
and all his relations, because she had been acquitted of anything dishonourable. 

Dan 13:64 From that day onwards, Daniel’s reputation stood high with the people. 

Dan 14:1 When King Astyages joined his ancestors, Cyrus of Persia succeeded him. 

Dan 14:2 Daniel was very close to the king, who respected him more than any of his other friends. 

Dan 14:3 Now, in Babylon there was an idol called Bel, to which twelve bushels of the finest flour, forty sheep 
and six measures of wine were offered every day. 

Dan 14:4 The king venerated this idol and used to go and worship it every day. Daniel, however, worshipped his 
own God. 

Dan 14:5 “Why do you not worship Bel?”. the king asked Daniel. “I do not worship idols made by human hand”, 
Daniel replied, “I worship the living God who made heaven and earth and who is lord over all living creatures”. 
Dan 14:6 “Do you not believe, then”, said the king, “that Bel is a living god? Can you not see how much he eats 
and drinks each day?”. 

Dan 14:7 Daniel laughed. “Your Majesty”, he said, “do not be taken in; he is clay inside, and bronze outside, and 
has never eaten or drunk anything”. 

Dan 14:8 This made the king angry; he summoned his priests, “Tell me who eats all this food”, he said, “or die. 
Prove to me that Bel really eats it, and I will have Daniel put to death for blaspheming him”. 

Dan 14:9 Daniel said to the king, “Let it be as you say”. 

Dan 14:10 There were seventy of these priests, to say nothing of their wives and children. The king went to the 
temple of Bel, taking Daniel with him. 

Dan 14:1 1 The priests of Bel said to him, “We shall now go out, and you, Your Majesty, will lay out the meal and 
mix the wine and set it out. Then, lock the door and seal it with your personal seal. If, when you return in the 
morning, you do not find that everything has been eaten by Bel, let us be put to death; otherwise let Daniel, that 
slanderer!’ 

Dan 14:12 They were thinking — hence their confidence — of a secret entrance which they had made under the 
table, and by which they came in regularly and took the offerings away. 

Dan 14:13 When the priests had gone and the king had set out the food for Bel, 

Dan 14:14 Daniel made his servants bring ashes and spread them all over the temple floor, with no other 
witness than the king. They then left the building, shut the door and, sealing it with the king’s seal, went away. 
Dan 14:15 That night, as usual, the priests came with their wives and children; they ate and drank everything. 
Dan 14:16 The king was up very early next morning, and Daniel with him. 

Dan 14:17 “Daniel”, said the king, “are the seals intact?”. “They are intact, Your Majesty”, he replied. 

Dan 14:18 The king then opened the door and, taking one look at the table, exclaimed, “You are great, O Bel! 
There is no deception in you!”. 

Dan 14:19 But Daniel laughed; and, restraining the king from going in any further, he said, “Look at the floor and 
take note whose footmarks these are!”. 

Dan 14:20 “I can see the footmarks of men, of women and of children”, said the king, 

Dan 14:21 and angrily ordered the priests to be arrested, with their wives and children. They then showed him 
the secret door through which they used to come and take what was on the table. 

Dan 14:22 The king had them put to death and handed Bel over to Daniel who destroyed both the idol and its 
temple. 

Dan 14:23 There was a great dragon which the Babylonians worshipped too. 

Dan 14:24 The king said to Daniel, “Are you going to tell me that this is made of bronze? Look, it is alive; it eats 
and drinks; you cannot deny that this is a living god; worship it, then”. 

Dan 14:25 Daniel replied, “I will worship the Lord my God; he is the living God. With your permission, Your 
Majesty, without using either sword or club, I shall kill this dragon”. 

Dan 14:26 “You have my permission”, said the king. 

Dan 14:27 Whereupon, Daniel took some pitch, some fat and some hair and boiled them up together, rolled the 
mixture into balls and fed them to the dragon; the dragon swallowed them and burst. Daniel said, “Now look at 
the sort of thing you worship!”. 

Dan 14:28 The Babylonians were furious when they heard about this and rose against the king. “The king has 
turned Jew”, they said, “he has allowed Bel to be overthrown, and the dragon to be killed, and he has put the 
priests to death”. 

Dan 14:29 So they went to the king and said, “Hand Daniel over to us or else we shall kill you and your family”. 
Dan 14:30 They pressed him so hard that the king found himself forced to hand Daniel over to them. 



Dan 14:31 They threw Daniel into the lion pit, and there he stayed for six days. 

Dan 14:32 In the pit were seven lions, which were given two human bodies and two sheep every day; but for 
this period they were not given anything, to make sure they would eat Daniel. 

Dan 14:33 Now, the prophet Habakkuk was in Judaea: he had been making a stew and breaking up bread into 
a basket. He was on his way to the fields, taking this to the harvesters, 

Dan 14:34 when the angel of the Lord spoke to him, Take the meal you are carrying to Babylon, and give it to 
Daniel in the lion pit”. 

Dan 14:35 “Lord”, replied Habakkuk, “I have not even seen Babylon and know nothing about this pit”. 

Dan 1 4:36 The angel of the Lord took hold of his head and carried him off by the hair to Babylon where, with a 
great blast of his breath, he set Habakkuk down on the edge of the pit. 

Dan 14:37 “Daniel, Daniel”, Habakkuk shouted, “take the meal that God has sent you”. 

Dan 14:38 And Daniel said, “You have kept me in mind, O God; you have not deserted those who love you”. 

Dan 14:39 Rising to his feet, he ate the meal, while the angel of God carried Habakkuk back in a moment to his 
own country. 

Dan 14:40 On the seventh day, the king came to lament over Daniel; on reaching the pit he looked inside, and 
there sat Daniel. 

Dan 14:41 “You are great, O Lord, God of Daniel”, he exclaimed, “there is no god but you!”. 

Dan 14:42 He then had Daniel released from the pit and the plotters of Daniel’s ruin thrown in instead, where 
they were instantly eaten before his eyes. 

Hos 1:1 The word of Yahweh which came to Hosea son of Beeri during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and 
Hezekiah kings of Judah, and of Jeroboam son of Joash, king of Israel. 

Hos 1 :2 The beginning of what Yahweh said through Hosea: Yahweh said to Hosea, “Go, marry a whore, and 
get children with a whore; for the country itself has become nothing but a whore by abandoning Yahweh”. 

Hos 1 :3 So he went and married Gomer daughter of Diblaim, who conceived and bore him a son. 

Hos 1 :4 Yahweh then said to him, “Call him Jezreel, for in a little while I shall punish the House of Jehu for the 
bloodshed at Jezreel and put an end to the sovereignty of the House of Israel. 

Hos 1 :5 When that day comes, I shall break the bow of Israel in the Valley of Jezreel”. 

Hos 1 :6 She conceived a second time and gave birth to a daughter. Yahweh then said to him, “Call her Lo- 
Ruhamah, for I shall show no more pity for the House of Israel, I shall never forgive them again. 

Hos 1 :7 (Instead, I shall take pity on the House of Judah and shall save them, not by bow or sword or force of 
arms, not by horses or horsemen, but by Yahweh their God.)” 

Hos 1 :8 After weaning Lo-Ruhamah, she conceived and gave birth to a son. 

Hos 1 :9 Yahweh said, “Call him Lo-Ammi, for you are not my people and I do not exist for you”. 

Hos 2:1 But the Israelites will become as numerous as the sands of the sea, which cannot be measured or 
counted. In the very place where they were told, “You are not my people”, they will be told they are “Children of 
the living God'. 

Hos 2:2 The Judaeans and Israelites will be reunited and will choose themselves a single head, and will spread 
far beyond their country, for great will be the Day of Jezreel! 

Hos 2:3 Then call your brothers, “My people”, and your sisters, “You have been pitied'. 

Hos 2:4 To court, take your mother to court! For she is no longer my wife nor am I her husband. She must either 
remove her whoring ways from her face and her adulteries from between her breasts, 

Hos 2:5 or I shall strip her and expose her naked as the day she was born; I shall make her as bare as the 
desert, I shall make her as dry as arid country, and let her die of thirst. 

Hos 2:6 And I shall feel no pity for her children since they are the children of her whorings. 

Hos 2:7 Yes, their mother has played the whore, she who conceived them has disgraced herself by saying, “I 
shall chase after my lovers; they will assure me my keep, my wool, my flax, my oil and my drinks”. 

Hos 2:8 This is why I shall block her way with thorns, and wall her in to stop her in her tracks; 

Hos 2:9 then if she chases her lovers she will not catch them, if she looks for them she will not find them, and 
then she will say, “I shall go back to my first husband, I was better off then than I am now;” 

Hos 2:10 she had never realised before that I was the one who was giving her the grain, new wine and oil, 
giving her more and more silver and gold which they have spent on Baal! 

Hos 2:1 1 This is why I shall take back my grain when it is due and my new wine, when the season for it comes. I 
shall withdraw my wool and my flax which were to cover her naked body, 

Hos 2:12 and then display her infamy before her lovers’ eyes- no one will take her from me then! 

Hos 2:13 I shall put an end to all her merrymaking, her festivals, her New Moons and her Sabbaths and all her 
solemn feasts. 

Hos 2:14 I shall make her vines and fig trees derelict of which she used to say, “These are the pay my lovers 
gave me”. I shall turn them into a jungle: wild animals will feed on them. 

Hos 2:15 I mean to make her pay for the feast-days on which she burnt incense to the Baals, when she tricked 



herself out in her earrings and necklaces to chase after her lovers, and forget me! -declares Yahweh. 

Hos 2:16 But look, I am going to seduce her and lead her into the desert and speak to her heart. 

Hos 2:17 There I shall give her back her vineyards, and make the Vale of Achor a gateway of hope. There she 
will respond as when she was young, as on the day when she came up from Egypt. 

Hos 2:18 When that day comes- declares Yahweh- you will call me, “My husband”, no more will you call me, “My 
Baal’. 

Hos 2:19 I shall banish the names of the Baals from her lips and their name will be mentioned no more. 

Hos 2:20 When that day comes I shall make a treaty for them with the wild animals, with the birds of heaven 
and the creeping things of the earth; I shall break the bow and the sword and warfare, and banish them from the 
country, and I will let them sleep secure. 

Hos 2:21 I shall betroth you to myself for ever, I shall betroth you in uprightness and justice, and faithful love 
and tenderness. 

Hos 2:22 Yes, I shall betroth you to myself in loyalty and in the knowledge of Yahweh. 

Hos 2:23 When that day comes, I shall respond -declares Yahweh- 1 shall respond to the heavens and they will 
respond to the earth 

Hos 2:24 and the earth will respond to the grain, the new wine and oil, and they will respond to Jezreel. 

Hos 2:25 I shall sow her in the country to be mine, I shall take pity on Lo-Ruhamah, I shall tell Lo-Ammi, “You 
are my people”, and he will say, “You are my God”. 

Hos 3:1 Yahweh said to me, “Go again, love a woman who loves another man, an adulteress, and love her as 
Yahweh loves the Israelites although they turn to other gods and love raisin cakes”. 

Hos 3:2 So I bought her for fifteen shekels of silver, a <i>homer</i> of barley and a skin of wine, 

Hos 3:3 and I said to her, “You will have to spend a long time waiting for me without playing the whore and 
without giving yourself to any man, and I will behave in the same way towards you”. 

Hos 3:4 For the Israelites will have to spend a long time without king or leader, without sacrifice or sacred pillar, 
without ephod or domestic images; 

Hos 3:5 but after that, the Israel- ites will return and again seek Yahweh their God and David their king, and turn 
trembling to Yahweh for his bounty in the final days. 

Hos 4:1 Israelites, hear what Yahweh says, for Yahweh indicts the citizens of the country: there is no loyalty, no 
faithful love, no knowledge of God in the country, 

Hos 4:2 only perjury and lying, murder, theft, adultery and violence, bloodshed after bloodshed. 

Hos 4:3 This is why the country is in mourning and all its citizens pining away, the wild animals also and birds of 
the sky, even the fish in the sea will disappear. 

Hos 4:4 But let no one denounce, no one rebuke; it is you, priest, that I denounce. 

Hos 4:5 Priest, you will stumble in broad daylight, and the prophet will stumble with you in the dark, and I will 
make your mother perish. 

Hos 4:6 My people perish for want of knowledge. Since you yourself have rejected knowledge, so I shall reject 
you from my priesthood; since you have forgotten the teaching of your God, I in my turn shall forget your 
children. 

Hos 4:7 The more of them there have been, the more they have sinned against me; they have bartered their 
Glory for Shame. 

Hos 4:8 They feed on the sin of my people, they are greedy for their iniquity. 

Hos 4:9 But as with the people, so with the priest, I shall punish them for their conduct, I shall pay them back for 
their deeds. 

Hos 4:10 They will eat but never be satisfied, they will play the whore but not grow more prolific, since they have 
deserted Yahweh to give themselves up 

Hos 4:1 1 to whoring. Old wine and new wine addle my people’s wits, 

Hos 4:12 they consult their block of wood, and their stick explains what they should do. For an urge to go 
whoring has led them astray and whoring they go and desert their God; 

Hos 4:13 they offer sacrifice on the mountain tops, they burn incense on the hills, under oak and poplar and 
terebinth, for pleasant is their shade. So, although your daughters play the whore and your daughters-in-law 
commit adultery, 

Hos 4:14 I shall not punish your daughters for playing the whore nor your daughters-in-law for committing 
adultery, when the men themselves are wandering off with whores and offering sacrifice with sacred prostitutes, 
for a people with no understanding is doomed. 

Hos 4:15 Though you, Israel, play the whore, there is no need for Judah to sin too. Do not go to Gilgal, do not 
go up to Beth-Aven, do not swear oaths “by Yahweh’s life”, 

Hos 4:16 for Israel is as stubborn as a stubborn heifer; so is Yahweh likely to pasture him like a lamb in a broad 
meadow? 

Hos 4:17 Ephraim has made a pact with idols- let him alone! 



Hos 4:18 Their drunken orgy over, they do nothing but play the whore, preferring Shame to their Pride; 

Hos 4:19 the wind with its wings will carry them off and their sacrifices will bring them nothing but disgrace. 

Hos 5:1 Hear this, you priests, listen, House of Israel, pay attention, royal House, for it is you who have justice in 
your care, but you have been a snare at Mizpah and a net outspread on Tabor. 

Hos 5:2 They have dug the ditch deep at Shittim and so I am going to punish them all. 

Hos 5:3 Ephraim have I known, Israel is not hidden from me; and yet, Ephraim, you have played the whore, 
Israel is befouled. 

Hos 5:4 Their deeds do not allow them to return to their God, since an urge to play the whore possesses them 
and they no longer know Yahweh. 

Hos 5:5 Israel’s arrogance is his accuser, the guilt of Israel and Ephraim is their undoing, Judah too will be 
undone with them. 

Hos 5:6 Though they go in search of Yahweh with their sheep and cattle, they will not find him; he has 
withdrawn from them. 

Hos 5:7 They have betrayed Yahweh because they have fathered bastards; now the new moon will devour 
them and their fields. 

Hos 5:8 Sound the horn in Gibeah, the trumpet in Ramah, raise the war cry in Beth-Aven, “We are behind you, 
Benjamin!”. 

Hos 5:9 When the day of punishment comes, Ephraim will be a wasteland; on the tribes of Israel I have 
pronounced certain doom. 

Hos 5:10 The rulers of Judah act like men who move the boundary stone; I shall pour my wrath out on them like 
a flood. 

Hos 5:1 1 Ephraim is oppressed, crushed by the sentence, for having deliberately followed a Lie. 

Hos 5:12 Because of this, I shall be like ringworm for Ephraim and like gangrene for the House of Judah. 

Hos 5:13 Once Ephraim realised that he was sick and Judah that he had an ulcer, Ephraim then went to 
Assyria, he sent messengers to the Great King; but he has no power to cure you or to heal you of your sore; 

Hos 5:14 for I shall be like a lion to Ephraim, like a young lion to the House of Judah; I myself shall rend them, 
then go my way, shall carry them off, beyond hope of rescue. 

Hos 5:15 I shall go back to my place until they confess their guilt and seek me, seek me eagerly in their distress. 
Hos 6:1 Come, let us return to Yahweh. He has rent us and he will heal us; he has struck us and he will bind up 
our wounds; 

Hos 6:2 after two days he will revive us, on the third day he will raise us up and we shall live in his presence. 

Hos 6:3 Let us know, let us strive to know Yahweh; that he will come is as certain as the dawn. He will come to 
us like a shower, like the rain of springtime to the earth. 

Hos 6:4 What am I to do with you, Ephraim? What am I to do with you, Judah? For your love is like morning 
mist, like the dew that quickly disappears. 

Hos 6:5 This is why I have hacked them to pieces by means of the prophets, why I have killed them with words 
from my mouth, why my sentence will blaze forth like the dawn- 

Hos 6:6 for faithful love is what pleases me, not sacrifice; knowledge of God, not burnt offerings. 

Hos 6:7 But they have broken the covenant at Adam, there they have betrayed me. 

Hos 6:8 Gilead is a city of evil-doers, full of bloody footprints. 

Hos 6:9 Like so many robbers in ambush, a gang of priests commits murder on the road to Shechem- what 
infamous behaviour! 

Hos 6:10 At Bethel I have seen a horrible thing; there Ephraim plays the whore, Israel is befouled. 

Hos 6:1 1 For you too, Judah, a harvest is in store, when I restore my people’s fortunes. 

Hos 7:1 Whenever I would heal Israel, I am confronted by the guilt of Ephraim and the evil-doings of Samaria; 
for deceit is their principle of behaviour; the thief breaks into the house, marauders raid in the open; 

Hos 7:2 and they never pause to consider that I remember all their wicked deeds; and now their own deeds hem 
them in and stare me in the face. 

Hos 7:3 They amuse the king with their wickedness and the chief men with their lies. 

Hos 7:4 They are all adulterers, hot as an oven which the baker need not stoke from the time he has kneaded 
the dough until it rises. 

Hos 7:5 At the holiday for our king, the ministers become inflamed with wine, while he accepts the homage of 
people 

Hos 7:6 who laugh at him. Their hearts are like an oven as they plot, all night their passion slumbers, then in the 
morning it bursts into flame; 

Hos 7:7 yes, all of them as hot as ovens, they consume their rulers. All their kings have fallen thus, not one of 
them has ever called on me. 

Hos 7:8 Ephraim mixes with the nations. Ephraim is a half-baked cake. 

Hos 7:9 Foreigners have eaten his strength away but he is unconscious of it; even his hair is turning grey but he 



is unconscious of it. 

Hos 7:10 (Israel’s arrogance is his own accuser; but they do not come back to Yahweh their God or seek him, 
despite all this.) 

Hos 7:1 1 Ephraim is like a silly, witless pigeon calling on Egypt, turning to Assyria. 

Hos 7:12 Wherever they turn, I shall spread my net over them, I shall bring them down like the birds of the sky, I 
shall punish them for their perversity. 

Hos 7:13 Woe to them for having fled from me! Ruin seize them for having wronged me! I have rescued them 
again and again and they have only told lies about me. 

Hos 7:14 Theirs is no heartfelt cry to me when they lament on their beds; when they gash themselves over the 
grain and new wine, they are still rebelling against me. 

Hos 7:15 Though I supported and gave strength to their arms, they plan how to hurt me. 

Hos 7:16 They turn to what does not exist, they are like a faulty bow. Their leaders will fall by the sword 
because of their arrogant talk; how they will be laughed at in Egypt! 

Hos 8:1 Put the trumpet to your lips! Like an eagle, disaster is swooping on Yahweh’s home! Because they have 
violated my covenant and been unfaithful to my Law, 

Hos 8:2 in vain will they cry, “My God!”. In vain, “We, Israel, know you!”. 

Hos 8:3 Israel has rejected the good, the enemy will pursue them. 

Hos 8:4 They have set up kings, but without my consent, and appointed princes, but without my knowledge. 

With their silver and gold, they have made themselves idols, but only to be destroyed. 

Hos 8:5 I spurn your calf, Samaria! My anger blazes against them! How long will it be before they recover their 
innocence? 

Hos 8:6 For it is the product of Israel- a craftsman made the thing, it is no god at all! The calf of Samaria will be 
broken to pieces! 

Hos 8:7 Since they sow the wind, they will reap the whirlwind; stalk without ear, it will never yield flour- or if it 
does, foreigners will swallow it. 

Hos 8:8 Israel has himself been swallowed; now they are lost among the nations like something no one wants, 
Hos 8:9 for having made approaches to Assyria- like a wild donkey, all alone. Ephraim has rented lovers 
Hos 8:10 and because he has rented them from the nations I am now going to round them up; soon they will 
feel the weight of the king of princes! 

Hos 8:1 1 Ephraim keeps building altars for his sins, these very altars are themselves a sin. 

Hos 8:12 However much of my Law I write for him, Ephraim regards it as alien to him. 

Hos 8:13 They offer sacrifices to me and eat the meat, they do not win Yahweh’s favour. On the contrary, he will 
remember their guilt and punish their sins; they will have to go back to Egypt. 

Hos 8:14 Israel has forgotten his Maker and has built palaces, while Judah keeps on building fortified towns; but 
I shall send fire down on his cities to devour their citadels. 

Hos 9:1 No merrymaking, Israel, for you, no rejoicing like other peoples, for you have deserted your God to play 
the whore, you have loved the fee of prostitution on every threshing-floor. 

Hos 9:2 The threshing-floor and wine-press will not feed them; they will be disappointed of new wine. 

Hos 9:3 No more will they live in Yahweh’s country; Ephraim will have to go back to Egypt, and eat polluted food 
in Assyria. 

Hos 9:4 No more will they pour libations of wine to Yahweh, and their sacrifices will not win his favour but will be 
like funeral fare for them: whoëver eats them will be polluted; for their food will be for themselves alone, not 
being offered in Yahweh’s home. 

Hos 9:5 What will you do on the solemn feast-day, on the day of Yahweh’s festival? 

Hos 9:6 What a scene of devastastion they have left! Egypt will round them up, Memphis will bury them, nettles 
will inherit their fields and thorn-bushes invade their homesteads. 

Hos 9:7 The days of punishment have come, the days of retribution are here; Israel knows it! “The prophet is 
mad and the inspired man a fool!”. Great has been your guilt- all the greater then the hostility! 

Hos 9:8 The watchman of Ephraim is with my God: it is the prophet- and a fowler’s trap is placed on all his 
paths; and in the shrine of his God there is enmity towards him. 

Hos 9:9 They have become deeply corrupt as in the days of Gibeah; he will remember their guilt, he will punish 
their sins. 

Hos 9:10 It was like finding grapes in the desert when I found Israel, like seeing early fruit on a fig tree when I 
saw your ancestors; but when they reached Baal-Peor they devoted themselves to Shame and became as 
loathsome as the thing they loved. 

Hos 9:1 1 The glory of Ephraim will fly away like a bird: no giving birth, no pregnancy, no conceiving. 

Hos 9:12 If they rear their children, I shall take them away before they grow up! Woe to them indeed when I 
leave them! 

Hos 9:13 Ephraim looked to me like Tyre, planted in a meadow, so Ephraim will present his children to the 



slaughterer. 

Hos 9:14 Give them, Yahweh- what are you to give? - give them wombs that miscarry and dried-up breasts. 

Hos 9:15 Their wickedness appeared in full at Gilgal, there I came to hate them. Because of the wickedness of 
their deeds I shall drive them from my home, I shall love them no longer; all their princes are rebels. 

Hos 9:16 Ephraim is blasted, their root has dried out, they will bear no more fruit. And even if they do bear 
children I shall slaughter the darlings of their womb. 

Hos 9:17 Because they have not listened to him, my God will cast them off and they will become wanderers 
among the nations. 

Hos 10:1 Israel was a luxuriant vine yielding plenty of fruit. The more his fruit increased, the more altars he built; 
the richer his land became, the richer he made the sacred pillars. 

Hos 1 0:2 Theirs is a divided heart; now they will have to pay for it. He himself will hack down their altars and 
wreck their sacred pillars. 

Hos 1 0:3 Then they will say, “We have no king because we have not feared Yahweh, but what could the king do 
for us?”. 

Hos 10:4 Speeches are made, oaths sworn to no purpose, agreements concluded, and so-called justice 
spreads like a poisonous weed along the furrows of the fields! 

Hos 1 0:5 Samaria’s citizens will tremble for the calf of Beth-Aven; the people there will mourn for it, so will its 
idol-priests, as they exult in its glory once it has been carried away! 

Hos 10:6 It will be carried off to Assyria as tribute to the Great King. Ephraim will reap the shame, and Israel 
blush for his intentions. 

Hos 10:7 Samaria has had her day. Her king is like a straw drifting on the water. 

Hos 10:8 The high places of Aven, the sin of Israel, will be destroyed; thorns and thistles will grow over their 
altars. Then they will say to the mountains, “Cover us!”. and to the hills, “Fall on us!”. 

Hos 1 0:9 Since the days of Gibeah, Israel, you have sinned. There they have taken their stand, and will not war 
overtake the guilty at Gibeah? 

Hos 10:10 lam coming to punish them; nations will muster against them to punish them for their two crimes. 

Hos 10:11 Ephraim is a well-trained heifer that loves to tread the grain. But I have laid a yoke on her fine neck, I 
shall put Ephraim into harness, Judah will have to plough, Jacob must draw the harrow. 

Hos 10:12 Sow saving justice for yourselves, reap a harvest of faithful love; break up your fallow ground: it is 
time to seek out Yahweh until he comes to rain saving justice down on you. 

Hos 10:13 You have ploughed wickedness, you have reaped iniquity, you have eaten the fruit of falsehood. 
Because you have trusted in your chariots, in your great numbers of warriors, 

Hos 10:14 turmoil is going to break out among your people, and all your fortresses will be laid waste. As 
Shalman laid Beth-Arbel waste on the day of battle, dashing mothers to pieces on their children, 

Hos 10:15 so it shall be done to you, Bethel, because of your great wickedness; at dawn, the king of Israel will 
be no more. 

Hos 11:1 When Israel was a child I loved him, and I called my son out of Egypt. 

Hos 1 1 :2 But the more I called, the further they went away from me; they offered sacrifice to Baal and burnt 
incense to idols. 

Hos 11:31 myself taught Ephraim to walk, I myself took them by the arm, but they did not know that I was the 
one caring for them, 

Hos 1 1 :4 that I was leading them with human ties, with leading-strings of love, that, with them, I was like 
someöne lifting an infant to his cheek, and that I bent down to feed him. 

Hos 11:5 He will not have to go back to Egypt, Assyria will be his king instead! Since he has refused to come 
back to me, 

Hos 1 1 :6 the sword will rage through his cities, destroying the bars of his gates, devouring them because of 
their plots. 

Hos 11:7 My people are bent on disregarding me; if they are summoned to come up, not one of them makes a 
move. 

Hos 1 1 :8 Ephraim, how could I part with you? Israel, how could I give you up? How could I make you like 
Admah or treat you like Zeboiim? My heart within me is overwhelmed, fever grips my inmost being. 

Hos 11:91 will not give rein to my fierce anger, I will not destroy Ephraim again, for I am God, not man, the Holy 
One in your midst, and I shall not come to you in anger. 

Hos 11:10 They will follow Yahweh; he will roar like a lion, and when he roars, his children will come fluttering 
from the west, 

Hos 11:11 fluttering like sparrows from Egypt, like pigeons from Assyria, and I shall settle them in their homes 
-declares Yahweh. 

Hos 12:1 Ephraim besieges me with lying, the House of Israel with duplicity. (But Judah still is on God’s side, he 
is faithful to the Holy One.) 



Hos 12:2 Ephraim feeds himself on wind, all day he chases the wind from the East, he heaps up cheating and 
violence; they make a treaty with Assyria, at the same time sending oil to Egypt. 

Hos 12:3 Yahweh has a case against Judah, he will punish Jacob as his conduct merits, he will repay him as his 
deeds deserve. 

Hos 12:4 In the very womb he overreached his brother, in maturity he wrestled against God. 

Hos 12:5 He wrestled with the angel and beat him, he wept and pleaded with him. He met him at Bethel and 
there God spoke to us- 

Hos 12:6 yes, Yahweh, God Sabaoth, Yahweh is his title! 

Hos 12:7 So turn back with God’s help, maintain faithful love and loyalty and always put your trust in your God. 
Hos 12:8 Merchants use fraudulent scales. To defraud is his delight. 

Hos 12:9 “How rich I have become!”. says Ephraim, “I have made a fortune”. But of all his gains he will keep 
nothing because of the sin of which he is guilty. 

Hos 12:10 But I have been Yahweh your God since your days in Egypt and will make you live in tents again as 
in the days of Meeting. 

Hos 12:11 I will speak through prophets, I will give vision after vision and through the ministry of prophets will 
speak in parables. 

Hos 12:12 Is Gilead a sink of iniquity? Yes, they are a worthless lot! At Gilgal they sacrifice to bulls, that is why 
their altars are like heaps of stones in a ploughed field. 

Hos 12:13 Jacob fled to the countryside of Aram, Israel slaved to win a wife, to win a wife he looked after sheep. 
Hos 12:14 By a prophet Yahweh brought Israel out of Egypt and by a prophet Israel was preserved. 

Hos 12:15 Ephraim gave bitter provocation- Yahweh will bring his bloodshed down on him, his Lord will repay 
him for his insult. 

Hos 13:1 When Ephraim used to speak, all trembled; he was a power in Israel; but once he had incurred guilt 
with Baal, he died. 

Hos 1 3:2 And now they compound their sins by casting images for themselves out of their silver, idols of their 
own invention, the work of craftsmen, all of it! “Sacrifice to them”, they say! Men bestow kisses to calves! 

Hos 1 3:3 That is why they will be like morning mist, like the dew that quickly disappears, like the chaff whirled 
from the threshing-floor, like smoke escaping through the window. 

Hos 13:4 But I have been Yahweh your God since your days in Egypt when you knew no god but me, since you 
had no one else to save you. 

Hos 13:5 I cared for you in the desert, in the land of dreadful drought. 

Hos 13:6 I pastured them, and they were satisfied; once satisfied, their hearts grew proud, and therefore they 
forgot me. 

Hos 13:7 So now I shall be like a lion to them, like a leopard I shall lurk beside the road, 

Hos 1 3:8 like a bear robbed of her cubs I shall meet them and rend the membrane of their heart, and there like 
a lioness I shall eat them, like a wild beast tear them to shreds. 

Hos 13:9 Israel, you have destroyed yourself though in me lies your help. 

Hos 13:10 Your king, where is he now, to save you, or the governors in all your cities? - whom you once 
pleaded for, saying, “Give me a king and princes!”. 

Hos 13:11 In my anger I gave you a king and in my wrath I have taken him away. 

Hos 13:12 Ephraim’s guilt is packed away, his sin is locked up. 

Hos 13:13 Pangs as of childbirth overtake him, and a stupid child he is; his time is due, but he does not leave 
the womb. 

Hos 13:14 Shall I save them from the clutches of Sheol? Shall I buy them back from Death? Where are your 
plagues, Death? Where are your scourges, Sheol? Compassion will be banished from my sight! 

Hos 13:15 Though Ephraim bears more fruit than his brothers, the wind from the East will come, Yahweh’s 
breath blowing up from the desert to dry his spring, to dry up his fountain, to strip his treasury of everything worth 
having. 

Hos 14:1 Samaria will pay the penalty for having rebelled against her God. They will fall by the sword, their little 
children will be dashed to pieces and their pregnant women disembowelled. 

Hos 14:2 Israel, come back to Yahweh your God your guilt was the cause of your downfall. 

Hos 14:3 Provide yourself with words and come back to Yahweh. Say to him, “Take all guilt away and give us 
what is good, instead of bulls we will dedicate to you our lips. 

Hos 14:4 Assyria cannot save us, we will not ride horses any more, or say, ‘Our God!’. to our own handiwork, for 
you are the one in whom orphans find compassion”. 

Hos 14:5 I shall cure them of their disloyalty, I shall love them with all my heart, for my anger has turned away 
from them. 

Hos 14:6 I shall fall like dew on Israel, he will bloom like the lily and thrust out roots like the cedar of Lebanon; 
Hos 14:7 he will put out new shoots, he will have the beauty of the olive tree and the fragrance of Lebanon. 



Hos 14:8 They will come back to live in my shade; they will grow wheat again, they will make the vine flourish, 
their wine will be as famous as Lebanon’s. 

Hos 14:9 What has Ephraim to do with idols any more when I hear him and watch over him? I am like an 
evergreen cypress, you owe your fruitfulness to me. 

Hos 14:10 Let the wise understand these words, let the intelligent grasp their meaning, for Yahweh’s ways are 
straight and the upright will walk in them, but sinners will stumble. 

Joe 1:1 The word of Yahweh that was addressed to Joel son of Pethuel. 

Joe 1 :2 Listen to this, you elders; everybody in the country, attend! Has anything like this ever happened in your 
day, or in your ancestors’ days? 

Joe 1 :3 Tell your children about it and let your children tell their children, and their children the next generation! 
Joe 1 :4 What the nibbler has left, the grown locust has eaten, what the grown locust has left, the hopper has 
eaten, and what the hopper has left, the shearer has eaten. 

Joe 1 :5 Wake up, you drunkards, and weep! All you wine-bibbers, lament for the new wine: it has been 
snatched from your lips. 

Joe 1 :6 For a nation has invaded my country, mighty and innumerable, with teeth like a lion’s teeth, with the 
fangs of a lioness. 

Joe 1:7 It has reduced my vines to a desolation and my fig trees to splinters, stripped them and broken them 
down, leaving their branches white. 

Joe 1 :8 Mourn, as a virgin-bride in sackcloth for the bridegroom of her youth! 

Joe 1:9 Cereal offering and libation are lost to Yahweh’s Temple. The priests, the ministers of Yahweh, are in 
mourning. 

Joe 1:10 The fields are ruined, the land is in mourning, for the grain has been ruined, the new wine has failed, of 
olive oil only a trickle. 

Joe 1:11 Stand dismayed, you farmers, wail, you vinedressers, for the wheat, for the barley! The harvest of the 
fields has been lost! 

Joe 1:12 The vine has withered, the fig tree wilts away; pomegranate, palm tree, apple tree, every tree in the 
countryside is dry, and for human beings joy has run dry too. 

Joe 1:13 Priests, put on sackcloth and lament! You ministers of the altar, wail! Come here, lie in sackcloth all 
night long, you ministers of my God! For the Temple of your God has been deprived of cereal offering and 
libation. 

Joe 1:14 Order a fast, proclaim a solemn assembly; you elders, summon everybody in the country to the 
Temple of Yahweh your God. Cry out to Yahweh: 

Joe 1:15 “Alas for the day! For the Day of Yahweh is near, coming as destruction from Shaddai”. 

Joe 1:16 Has not the food disappeared before our very eyes? Have not joy and gladness vanished from the 
Temple of our God? 

Joe 1:17 The seeds shrivel under their clods; the granaries are deserted, the barns are in ruins, because the 
harvest has dried out. 

Joe 1:18 Loudly the cattle groan! The herds of oxen are bewildered because they have no pasture. The flocks of 
sheep bear the punishment too. 

Joe 1:19 Yahweh, to you I cry: for fire has devoured the desert pastures, flame has burnt up all the trees in the 
countryside. 

Joe 1 :20 Even the wild animals pant loudly for you, for the watercourses have run dry, and fire has devoured the 
desert pastures. 

Joe 2:1 Blow the ram's-horn in Zion, sound the alarm on my holy mountain! Let everybody in the country 
tremble, for the Day of Yahweh is coming, yes, it is near. 

Joe 2:2 Day of darkness and gloom, Day of cloud and blackness. Like the dawn, across the mountains spreads 
a vast and mighty people, such as has never been before, such as will never be again to the remotest ages. 

Joe 2:3 In their van a fire devours, in their rear a flame consumes. The country is like a garden of Eden ahead of 
them and a desert waste behind them. Nothing escapes them. 

Joe 2:4 They look like horses, like chargers they gallop on, 

Joe 2:5 with a racket like that of chariots they spring over the mountain tops, with a crackling like a blazing fire 
devouring the stubble, a mighty army in battle array. 

Joe 2:6 At the sight of them, people are appalled and every face grows pale. 

Joe 2:7 Like fighting men they press forward, like warriors they scale the walls, each marching straight ahead, 
not turning from his path; 

Joe 2:8 they never jostle each other, each marches straight ahead: arrows fly, they still press forward, never 
breaking ranks. 

Joe 2:9 They hurl themselves at the city, they leap onto the walls, swarm up the houses, getting in through the 
windows like thieves. 



Joe 2:10 As they come on, the earth quakes, the skies tremble, sun and moon grow dark, the stars lose their 
brilliance. 

Joe 2:1 1 Yahweh’s voice rings out at the head of his troops! For mighty indeed is his army, strong, the enforcer 
of his orders, for great is the Day of Yahweh, and very terrible — who can face it? 

Joe 2:12 “But now — declares Yahweh- come back to me with all your heart, fasting, weeping, mourning”. 

Joe 2:13 Tear your hearts and not your clothes, and come back to Yahweh your God, for he is gracious and 
compassionate, slow to anger, rich in faithful love, and he relents about inflicting disaster. 

Joe 2:14 Who knows if he will not come back, relent and leave a blessing behind him, a cereal offering and a 
libation to be presented to Yahweh your God? 

Joe 2:15 Blow the ram's-horn in Zion! Order a fast, proclaim a solemn assembly, 

Joe 2:16 call the people together, summon the community, assemble the elders, gather the children, even 
infants at the breast! Call the bridegroom from his bedroom and the bride from her bower! 

Joe 2:17 Let the priests, the ministers of Yahweh, stand weeping between portico and altar, saying, “Spare your 
people, Yahweh! Do not expose your heritage to the contempt, to the sarcasm of the nations! Why give the 
peoples cause to say, ‘Where is their God?’”. 

Joe 2:18 Then, becoming jealous over his country, Yahweh took pity on his people. 

Joe 2:19 Yahweh said in answer to his people, “Now I shall send you wheat, wine and olive oil until you have 
enough. Never again will I expose you to the contempt of the nations. 

Joe 2:20 I shall take the northerner far away from you and drive him into an arid, desolate land, his vanguard to 
the eastern sea, his rearguard to the western sea. He will give off a stench, he will give off a foul stink (for what 
he made bold to do)”. 

Joe 2:21 Land, do not be afraid; be glad, rejoice, for Yahweh has done great things. 

Joe 2:22 Wild animals, do not be afraid; the desert pastures are green again, the trees bear fruit, vine and fig 
tree yield their richness. 

Joe 2:23 Sons of Zion, be glad, rejoice in Yahweh your God; for he has given you autumn rain as justice 
demands, and he will send the rains down for you, the autumn and spring rain as of old. 

Joe 2:24 The threshing-floors will be full of grain, the vats overflow with wine and oil. 

Joe 2:25 “I will make up to you for the years devoured by grown locust and hopper, by shearer and young 
locust, my great army which I sent to invade you. 

Joe 2:26 “You will eat to your heart’s content, and praise the name of Yahweh your God who has treated you so 
wonderfully. (My people will never be humiliated again!) 

Joe 2:27 “And you will know that I am among you in Israel, I, Yahweh your God, and no one else. My people will 
never be humiliated again!”. 

Joe 3:1 “After this I shall pour out my spirit on all humanity. Your sons and daughters shall prophesy, your old 
people shall dream dreams, and your young people see visions. 

Joe 3:2 Even on the slaves, men and women, shall I pour out my spirit in those days. 

Joe 3:3 I shall show portents in the sky and on earth, blood and fire and columns of smoke”. 

Joe 3:4 The sun will be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the Day comes, that great and 
terrible Day. 

Joe 3:5 All who call on the name of Yahweh will be saved, for on Mount Zion will be those who have escaped, 
as Yahweh has said, and in Jerusalem a remnant whom Yahweh is calling. 

Joe 4:1 “For in those days and at that time, when I restore the fortunes of Judah and Jerusalem, 

Joe 4:2 I shall gather all the nations together and take them down to the Valley of Jehoshaphat; there I shall put 
them on trial because of Israel, my people and my heritage, for having scattered them among the nations and 
having divided my land among themselves. 

Joe 4:3 They drew lots for my people, bartering a boy for a whore and selling a girl for wine to drink. 

Joe 4:4 “And what are you to me, Tyre and Sidon and all you regions of Philistia? Can you take revenge on me? 

If you take revenge on me, I shall quickly, instantly, make your revenge recoil on your own heads 

Joe 4:5 for having taken my silver and gold away and carried off my valuable treasures to your temples, 

Joe 4:6 and for having sold the children of Judah and Jerusalem to the lonians, to be taken far away from their 
own frontiers. 

Joe 4:7 Look, I shall rouse them from the places to which you have sold them; I shall make your actions recoil 
on your own heads 

Joe 4:8 by selling your sons and daughters to the sons of Judah, who in turn will sell them to the Sabaeans, to a 
nation far away- Yahweh has spoken!”. 

Joe 4:9 Proclaim this among the nations. Prepare for war! Rouse the champions! All you troops, advance, 
march! 

Joe 4:10 Hammer your ploughshares into swords, your bill-hooks into spears; let the weakling say, “I am tough!”. 
Joe 4:1 1 Hurry and come, all the nations around, and assemble there! (Yahweh, send down your champions!) 



Joe 4:12 “Let the nations rouse themselves and march to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for there I shall sit in 
judgement on all the nations around. 

Joe 4:13 Ply the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come and tread, for the winepress is full; the vats are overflowing, 
so great is their wickedness!”. 

Joe 4:14 Multitude on multitude in the Valley of Decision! For the Day of Yahweh is near in the Valley of the 
Verdict! 

Joe 4:15 Sun and moon grow dark, the stars lose their brilliance. 

Joe 4:16 Yahweh roars from Zion, he thunders from Jerusalem; heaven and earth tremble. But Yahweh will be a 
shelter for his people, a stronghold for the Israelites. 

Joe 4:17 “Then you will know that I am Yahweh your God residing on Zion, my holy mountain. Jerusalem will 
then be a sanctuary, no foreigners will overrun it ever again”. 

Joe 4:18 When that Day comes, the mountains will run with new wine and the hills will flow with milk, and all the 
stream-beds of Judah will run with water. A fountain will spring from Yahweh’s Temple and water the Gorge of 
the Acacias. 

Joe 4:19 Egypt will become a desolation, and Edom a desert waste on account of the violence done to the 
children of Judah whose innocent blood they shed in their country. 

Joe 4:20 But Judah will be inhabited for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation! 

Joe 4:21 “I shall avenge their blood and let none go unpunished”, and Yahweh will dwell in Zion. 

Amo 1:1 Words of Amos one of the shepherds of Tekoa. The visions he had about Israel, in the time of Uzziah 
king of Judah and Jeroboam son of Joash, king of Israel, two years before the earthquake. 

Amo 1:2 Fie said: Yahweh roars from Zion, and makes himself heard from Jerusalem; the shepherds’ pastures 
mourn, and the crown of Carmel dries up. 

Amo 1:3 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of Damascus, I have made my decree and will 
not relent: because they have threshed Gilead with iron threshing-sledges, 

Amo 1 :4 I shall send fire down on the House of Hazael to devour the palaces of Ben-Hadad; 

Amo 1 :5 I shall break the gate-bar of Damascus, I shall destroy the inhabitant of Bikath-Aven, the holder of the 
sceptre in Beth-Eden, and the people of Aram will be deported to Kir, Yahweh says. 

Amo 1 :6 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of Gaza, I have made my decree and will not 
relent: because they have deported entire nations as slaves to Edom, 

Amo 1 :7 I shall send fire down on the walls of Gaza to devour its palaces; 

Amo 1 :8 I shall destroy the inhabitant of Ashdod, the holder of the sceptre in Ashkelon; I shall turn my hand 
against Ekron and the remnant of the Philistines will perish, says the Lord Yahweh. 

Amo 1:9 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of Tyre, I have made my decree and will not 
relent: because they have handed hosts of captives over to Edom, heedless of a covenant of brotherhood, 

Amo 1:10 I shall send fire down on the walls of Tyre to devour its palaces. 

Amo 1:11 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of Edom, I have made my decree and will not 
relent: because he has pursued his brother with the sword, because he has stifled any sense of pity, and 
perpetually nursed his anger and constantly cherished his rage, 

Amo 1:12 I shall send fire down on Teman to devour the palaces of Bozrah. 

Amo 1:13 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of the Ammonites, I have made my decree 
and will not relent: because they have disembowelled the pregnant women of Gilead in order to extend their own 
frontiers, 

Amo 1:14 I shall light a fire against the walls of Rabbah to devour its palaces amid war cries on the day of battle, 
in a whirlwind on the day of storm, 

Amo 1:15 and their king shall go into captivity, he and his chief men with him, says Yahweh. 

Amo 2:1 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of Moab, I have made my decree and will not 
relent: because they have burnt the bones of the king of Edom to ash, 

Amo 2:2 I shall send fire down into Moab to devour the palaces of Kerioth, and Moab will die in the tumult, amid 
war cries and the blare of trumpets; 

Amo 2:3 I shall destroy the ruler there and slaughter all the chief men there with him, says Yahweh. 

Amo 2:4 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of Judah, I have made my decree and will not 
relent: because they have despised Yahweh’s law and not kept his commandments, since their Falsehoods, 
which their ancestors followed, have led them astray, 

Amo 2:5 I shall send fire down on Judah to devour the palaces of Jerusalem. 

Amo 2:6 Yahweh says this: For the three crimes, the four crimes of Israel, I have made my decree and will not 
relent: because they have sold the upright for silver and the poor for a pair of sandals, 

Amo 2:7 because they have crushed the heads of the weak into the dust and thrust the rights of the oppressed 
to one side, father and son sleeping with the same girl and thus profaning my holy name, 

Amo 2:8 lying down beside every altar on clothes acquired as pledges, and drinking the wine of the people they 



have fined in the house of their god. 

Amo 2:9 Yet it was I who destroyed the Amorite before them, he who was as tall as the cedars, as strong as the 
oaks; I who destroyed his fruit above ground and his roots below. 

Amo 2:10 It was I who brought you up from Egypt and for forty years led you through the desert to take 
possession of the Amorite’s country; 

Amo 2:1 1 I who raised up prophets from your sons and Nazirites from your young men. Israelites, is this not 
true? -declares Yahweh! 

Amo 2:12 But you have made the Nazirite drink wine and given orders to the prophets, “Do not prophesy”. 

Amo 2:13 Very well! Like a cart overloaded with sheaves I shall crush you where you stand; 

Amo 2:14 flight will be cut off for the swift, the strong will have no chance to exert his strength nor the warrior be 
able to save his life; 

Amo 2:15 the archer will not stand his ground, the swift of foot will not escape, nor will the horseman save his 
life; 

Amo 2:16 even the bravest of warriors will jettison his arms and run away, that day! -declares Yahweh! 

Amo 3:1 Listen, Israelites, to this prophecy which Yahweh pronounces against you, against the whole family 
which I brought up from Egypt: 

Amo 3:2 You alone have I intimately known of all the families of earth, that is why I shall punish you for all your 
wrong-doings. 

Amo 3:3 Do two people travel together unless they have agreed to do so? 

Amo 3:4 Does the lion roar in the forest if it has no prey? Does the young lion growl in his lair if it has caught 

nothing? 

Amo 3:5 Does a bird fall on the ground in a net unless a trap has been set for it? Will the net spring up from the 
ground without catching something? 

Amo 3:6 Does the trumpet sound in the city without the people being alarmed? Does misfortune come to a city if 
Yahweh has not caused it? 

Amo 3:7 No indeed, Lord Yahweh does nothing without revealing his secret to his servants the prophets. 

Amo 3:8 The lion roars: who is not afraid? Lord Yahweh has spoken: who will not prophesy? 

Amo 3:9 From the palace roofs of Assyria and from the palace roofs of Egypt, proclaim aloud, “Assemble on the 
hills of Samaria and observe the grave disorders inside her and the acts of oppression there!”. 

Amo 3:10 Little they know of right conduct -declares Yahweh- who cram their palaces with violence and 
extortion. 

Amo 3:1 1 This is why — Lord Yahweh says this- an enemy will soon besiege the land, he will bring down your 
strength and your palaces will be looted. 

Amo 3:12 Yahweh says this: As the shepherd rescues two legs or the tip of an ear from the lion’s mouth, so will 
the children of Israel be salvaged who now loll in Samaria in the corners of their beds, on their divans of 
Damascus. 

Amo 3:13 Listen and testify against the House of Jacob -declares the Lord Yahweh, God Sabaoth- 
Amo 3:14 the day when I punish Israel for his crimes I shall also punish the altars of Bethel; the horns of the 
altar will be hacked off and will fall to the ground. 

Amo 3:15 I shall blast winter house with summer house, ivory houses will be destroyed and many mansions 
cease to be -declares Yahweh. 

Amo 4:1 Listen to this saying, you cows of Bashan living on the hill of Samaria, exploiting the weak and ill- 
treating the poor, saying to your husbands, “Bring us something to drink!”. 

Amo 4:2 The Lord God has sworn by his holiness: Look, the days will soon be on you when he will use hooks to 
drag you away and fish-hooks for the very last of you; 

Amo 4:3 through the breaches in the wall you will leave, each one straight ahead, and be herded away towards 
Hermon -declares Yahweh. 

Amo 4:4 Go to Bethel, and sin, to Gilgal, and sin even harder! Bring your sacrifices each morning, your tithes 
every third day, 

Amo 4:5 burn your thank-offering of leaven and widely publicise your free-will offerings, for this, children of 
Israel, is what makes you happy -declares the Lord Yahweh. 

Amo 4:6 I even gave you clean teeth in all your towns and a shortage of food in all your villages and still you 
would not come back to me -declares Yahweh. 

Amo 4:7 I even withheld the rain from you full three months before harvest-time; I caused rain to fall in one town 
and caused no rain to fall in another; one field was rained on and the next for want of rain dried up; 

Amo 4:8 two towns, three towns went tottering to one town for water to drink but went unsatisfied, and still you 
would not come back to me -declares Yahweh. 

Amo 4:9 I struck you with blight and mildew, I dried up your gardens and vineyards; the locust devoured your fig 
trees and olive trees and still you would not come back to me -declares Yahweh. 



Amo 4:10 I sent plague on you like Egypt’s plague, I slaughtered your young men with the sword and at the 
same time your horses were captured; I filled your nostrils with the stench of your camps and still you would not 
come back to me -declares Yahweh. 

Amo 4:1 1 I overturned you as God overturned Sodom and Gomorrah; you were like a brand snatched from the 
blaze and still you would not come back to me -declares Yahweh. 

Amo 4:12 So this, Israel, is what I plan to do to you. Because I am going to do this to you, Israel, prepare to 
meet your God! 

Amo 4:13 For look, he it is who forges the mountains, creates the wind, who reveals his mind to humankind, 
changes the dawn into darkness and strides on the heights of the world: Yahweh, God Sabaoth, is his name. 
Amo 5:1 Listen to this word which I utter against you, it is a dirge, House of Israel: 

Amo 5:2 She has fallen down, never to rise again, the virgin Israel. There she lies on her own soil, with no one 
to lift her up. 

Amo 5:3 For Lord Yahweh says this: The town which used to put a thousand in the field will be left with a 
hundred, and the one which used to put a hundred will be left with ten, to fight for the House of Israel. 

Amo 5:4 For Yahweh says this to the House of Israel: Seek me out and you will survive, 

Amo 5:5 but do not seek out Bethel, do not go to Gilgal, do not journey to Beersheba, for Gilgal is going into 
captivity and Bethel will be brought to nothing. 

Amo 5:6 Seek out Yahweh and you will survive or else he will sweep like fire upon the House of Joseph and 
burn it down, with no one at Bethel able to quench the flames. 

Amo 5:7 They turn justice into wormwood and throw uprightness to the ground. 

Amo 5:8 He it is who makes the Pleiades and Orion, who turns shadow dark as death into morning and day to 
darkest night, who summons the waters of the sea and pours them over the surface of the land. Yahweh is his 
name. 

Amo 5:9 He brings destruction on the strong and ruin comes on the fortress. 

Amo 5:10 They hate the man who teaches justice at the city gate and detest anyone who declares the truth. 

Amo 5:1 1 For trampling on the poor man and for extorting levies on his wheat: although you have built houses 
of dressed stone, you will not live in them; although you have planted pleasant vineyards, you will not drink wine 
from them: 

Amo 5:12 for I know how many your crimes are and how outrageous your sins, you oppressors of the upright, 
who hold people to ransom and thrust the poor aside at the gates. 

Amo 5:13 That is why anyone prudent keeps silent now, since the time is evil. 

Amo 5:14 Seek good and not evil so that you may survive, and Yahweh, God Sabaoth, be with you as you claim 
he is. 

Amo 5:15 Hate evil, love good, let justice reign at the city gate: it may be that Yahweh, God Sabaoth, will take 
pity on the remnant of Joseph. 

Amo 5:16 Therefore Yahweh Sabaoth, the Lord, says this: In every public square there will be lamentation, in 
every street they will cry out, “Alas! Alas!”. The farmer will be called on to mourn, the professional mourners to 
lament, 

Amo 5:17 and there will be wailing in every vineyard, for I mean to pass through among you, Yahweh says. 

Amo 5:18 Disaster for you who long for the Day of Yahweh! What will the Day of Yahweh mean for you? It will 
mean darkness, not light, 

Amo 5:19 as when someöne runs away from a lion, only to meet a bear; he goes into his house and puts his 
hand on the wall, only for a snake to bite him. 

Amo 5:20 Will not the Day of Yahweh be darkness, not light, totally dark, without a ray of light? 

Amo 5:21 I hate, I scorn your festivals, I take no pleasure in your solemn assemblies. 

Amo 5:22 When you bring me burnt offerings … your oblations, I do not accept them and I do not look at your 
communion sacrifices of fat cattle. 

Amo 5:23 Spare me the din of your chanting, let me hear none of your strumming on lyres, 

Amo 5:24 but let justice flow like water, and uprightness like a never-failing stream! 

Amo 5:25 Did you bring me sacrifices and oblations those forty years in the desert, House of Israel? 

Amo 5:26 Now you must shoulder Sakkuth your king and the star of your God, Kaiwan, those idols you made for 
yourselves; 

Amo 5:27 for I am about to drive you into captivity beyond Damascus, Yahweh says — God Sabaoth is his 
name. 

Amo 6:1 Disaster for those so comfortable in Zion and for those so confident on the hill of Samaria, the notables 
of this first of nations, those to whom the House of Israel has recourse! 

Amo 6:2 Travel to Calneh and look, go on from there to Hamath the great, then go down to Gath in Philistia. Are 
they more powerful than these kingdoms? Is their territory larger than yours? 

Amo 6:3 Thinking to defer the evil day, you are hastening the reign of violence. 



Amo 6:4 Lying on ivory beds and sprawling on their divans, they dine on lambs from the flock, and stall-fattened 
veal; 

Amo 6:5 they bawl to the sound of the lyre and, like David, they invent musical instruments; 

Amo 6:6 they drink wine by the bowlful, and lard themselves with the finest oils, but for the ruin of Joseph they 
care nothing. 

Amo 6:7 That is why they will now go into captivity, heading the column of captives. The sprawlers’ revelry is 
over. 

Amo 6:8 Lord Yahweh has sworn by his own self -declares Yahweh, God Sabaoth: I detest the pride of Jacob, I 
hate his palaces, I shall hand over the city and all in it. 

Amo 6:9 If ten people are left in a single house, they will die 

Amo 6:10 and a few will be left to carry the bones from the house, and they will say to anyone deep inside the 
house, Any more there?”. and he will answer, “No”. Then he will say, “Hushl-Yahweh’s name must not be 
mentioned”. 

Amo 6:1 1 For look, Yahweh gives the command: as he strikes, the great house falls to pieces and the small 
house is in fragments. 

Amo 6:12 Can horses gallop over rocks? Can the sea be ploughed with oxen? Yet you have changed justice 
into poison, and the fruit of uprightness into wormwood, 

Amo 6:13 while rejoicing over Lo-Debar and saying, “Wasn’t it by our own strength that we captured Karnaim?”. 
Amo 6:14 But look, House of Israel, against you -declares Yahweh, God Sabaoth- I am raising a nation to 
oppress you from the Pass of Hamath to the Gorge of the Arabah. 

Amo 7:1 This is what Lord Yahweh showed me: there was a swarm of locusts when the second crop was 
sprouting, full-grown locusts, after the king’s hay had been cut. 

Amo 7:2 When they had eaten all the grass in the land, I said, “Lord Yahweh, forgive, I beg you. How can Jacob 
survive, being so small?”. 

Amo 7:3 Then Yahweh relented; “It will not happen”, said Yahweh. 

Amo 7:4 This is what Lord Yahweh showed me: Lord Yahweh summoning fire in punishment; it had devoured 
the great Abyss and was encroaching on the land, 

Amo 7:5 when I said, “Lord Yahweh, stop, I beg you. How can Jacob survive, being so small?”. 

Amo 7:6 Then Yahweh relented; “This will not happen either”, said the Lord Yahweh. 

Amo 7:7 This is what he showed me: the Lord standing by a wall, with a plumb-line in his hand. 

Amo 7:8 “What do you see, Amos?”. Yahweh asked me. “A plumb-line”, I said. Then the Lord said, “Look, I am 
going to put a plumb-line in among my people Israel; never again will I overlook their offences. 

Amo 7:9 The high places of Isaac will be ruined and the sanctuaries of Israel laid waste, and, sword in hand, I 
will attack the House of Jeroboam”. 

Amo 7:10 Amaziah the priest of Bethel then sent word to Jeroboam king of Israel as follows, “Amos is plotting 
against you in the heart of the House of Israel; the country cannot tolerate his speeches. 

Amo 7:1 1 For this is what Amos says, ‘Jeroboam is going to die by the sword, and Israel will go into captivity far 
from its native land’”. 

Amo 7:12 To Amos himself Amaziah said, “Go away, seer, take yourself off to Judah, earn your living there, and 
there you can prophesy! 

Amo 7:13 But never again will you prophesy at Bethel, for this is a royal sanctuary, a national temple”. 

Amo 7:14 “I am not a prophet”, Amos replied to Amaziah, “nor do I belong to a prophetic brotherhood. I am 
merely a herdsman and dresser of sycamore-figs. 

Amo 7:15 But Yahweh took me as I followed the flock, and Yahweh said to me, ‘Go and prophesy to my people 
Israel’. 

Amo 7:16 So now listen to what Yahweh says: ‘You say: Do not prophesy against Israel, do not foretell doom 
on the House of Isaac!’. 

Amo 7:17 Very well, this is what Yahweh says, ‘Your wife will become a prostitute in the streets, your sons and 
daughters will fall by the sword, your land will be parcelled out by measuring line, and you yourself will die on 
polluted soil and Israel will go into captivity far from its own land!’”. 

Amo 8:1 This is what Lord Yahweh showed me: A basket of ripe fruit. 

Amo 8:2 “What do you see, Amos?”. he asked. “A basket of ripe fruit”, I said. Then Yahweh said, “The time is ripe 
for my people Israel; I will not continue to overlook their offences. 

Amo 8:3 That day, the palace songs will turn to howls, -declares the Lord Yahweh- the corpses will be many 
that are thrown down everywhere. Keep silent!”. 

Amo 8:4 Listen to this, you who crush the needy and reduce the oppressed to nothing, 

Amo 8:5 you who say, “When will New Moon be over so that we can sell our corn, and Sabbath, so that we can 
market our wheat? Then, we can make the bushel-measure smaller and the shekel-weight bigger, by 
fraudulently tampering with the scales. 



Amo 8:6 We can buy up the weak for silver and the poor for a pair of sandals, and even get a price for the 
sweepings of the wheat”. 

Amo 8:7 Yahweh has sworn by the pride of Jacob, “Never will I forget anything they have done”. 

Amo 8:8 Will not the earth tremble for this and all who live on it lament, as it all rises together like the Nile in 
Egypt, it swells and then subsides like the Egyptian Nile? 

Amo 8:9 “On that Day- declares the Lord Yahweh- 1 shall make the sun go down at noon and darken the earth in 
broad daylight. 

Amo 8:10 I shall turn your festivals into mourning and all your singing into lamentation; I shall make you all wear 
sacking round your waists and have all your heads shaved. I shall make it like the mourning for an only child, 
and it will end like the bitterest of days. 

Amo 8:1 1 “The days are coming- declares the Lord Yahweh- when I shall send a famine on the country, not 
hunger for food, not thirst for water, but famine for hearing Yahweh’s word. 

Amo 8:12 People will stagger from sea to sea, will wander from the north to the east, searching for Yahweh’s 
word, but will not find it. 

Amo 8:13 “That Day, fine girls and stalwart youths will faint from thirst. 

Amo 8:14 The people who swear by the Sin of Samaria, who say, ‘Long live your god, Dan!’. and ‘Hurrah for the 
pilgrimage to Beersheba!’. will all fall, never to rise again”. 

Amo 9:1 I saw the Lord standing by the altar, and he said, “Strike the top of the pillar so that the thresholds 
shake! Smash their heads in, one and all! And I shall put any survivors to the sword; whoëver runs away will not 
run far, whoëver escapes will not make good his escape. 

Amo 9:2 Should they burrow into Sheol, my hand will haul them out; should they climb to heaven, I shall bring 
them down. 

Amo 9:3 Should they hide on the top of Carmel, I shall track them down and catch them; should they hide from 
me on the sea bed, I shall order the Serpent there to bite them; 

Amo 9:4 if their enemies herd them into captivity, I shall order the sword to kill them there, and I shall fix my 
eyes on them for evil and not for good”. 

Amo 9:5 Lord Yahweh Sabaoth- he touches the earth and it melts, and all living things on it lament, as all rises 
together like the Nile in Egypt and then subsides like the Egyptian Nile. 

Amo 9:6 He who builds his mansions in the heavens, supporting his vault on the earth; who summons the 
waters of the sea and pours them over the surface of the land: Yahweh is his name. 

Amo 9:7 Are not you and the Cushites all the same to me, children of Israel? - declares Yahweh. Did I not bring 
Israel up from Egypt and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Aramaeans from Kir? 

Amo 9:8 Look, Lord Yahweh’s eyes are on the sinful kingdom, I shall wipe it off the face of the earth, although I 
shall not destroy the House of Jacob completely -declares Yahweh. 

Amo 9:9 For look, I shall give the command and shall shake out the House of Israel among all nations as a 
sieve is shaken out without one grain falling on the ground. 

Amo 9:10 All the sinners of my people will perish by the sword, who say, “Disaster will never approach or 
overtake us”. 

Amo 9:1 1 On that Day, I shall rebuild the tottering hut of David, make good the gaps in it, restore its ruins and 
rebuild it as it was in the days of old, 

Amo 9:12 for them to be master of what is left of Edom and of all the nations once called mine -Yahweh 
declares, and he will perform it. 

Amo 9:13 The days are coming- declares Yahweh- when the ploughman will tread on the heels of the reaper, 
and the treader of grapes on the heels of the sower of seed, and the mountains will run with new wine and the 
hills all flow with it. 

Amo 9:14 I shall restore the fortunes of my people Israel; they will rebuild the ruined cities and live in them, they 
will plant vineyards and drink their wine, they will lay out gardens and eat their produce. 

Amo 9:15 And I shall plant them in their own soil and they will never be uprooted again from the country which I 
have given them, declares Yahweh, your God. 

Oba 1:1 Vision of Obadiah: about Edom. I have received a message from Yahweh, a herald has been sent 
throughout the nations: “Up! Let us march against this people. Into battle!”. The Lord Yahweh says this: 

Oba 1:2 Look, I have reduced you to the smallest of nations, you are now beneath contempt. 

Oba 1:3 Your proud heart has misled you, you whose home is in the crannies of the Rock, who make the 
heights your dwelling, who think to yourself, “Who can bring me down to earth?”. 

Oba 1:4 Though you soar like an eagle, though you set your nest among the stars, I shall bring you down from 
therel-declares Yahweh. 

Oba 1 :5 If thieves were to come to you (or robbers during the night) surely they would steal only as much as 
they wanted? If grape-pickers were to come to you, surely they would leave a few gleanings? But how you have 
been pillaged! 



Oba 1:6 How Esau has been looted, his hidden treasures routed out! 

Oba 1:7 Your allies all pursued you right to the frontier, your confederates kept you in suspense, then got the 
better of you, your own guests laid a trap for you, “He has quite lost his wits”. 

Oba 1:8 When that day comes- declares Yahweh- shall I not eliminate sages from Edom and intelligence from 
Mount Esau? 

Oba 1:9 Your warriors, Teman, will be so demoralised that the people of Mount Esau will be massacred to the 
last one. For the slaughter, 

Oba 1:10 for the violence done to your brother Jacob, shame will cover you and you will be annihilated for ever. 
Oba 1:11 On the day, when you stood aloof while strangers carried off his riches, while foreigners passed 
through his gate and cast lots for Jerusalem, you were as bad as the rest of them. 

Oba 1:12 Do not feast your eyes on your brother on the day of his misfortune. Do not gloat over the children of 
Judah on the day of their ruin. Do not play the braggart on the day of distress. 

Oba 1:13 Do not enter my people’s gate on their day of calamity. Do not, you especially, feast your eyes on their 
suffering on their day of calamity. Do not touch their possessions on their day of calamity. 

Oba 1:14 Do not wait at the crossroads to annihilate their fugitives. Do not hand over their survivors on the day 
of distress. 

Oba 1:15 For the Day of Yahweh is near for all the nations. As you have done, so will it be done to you: your 
deeds will recoil on your own head. 

Oba 1:16 Just as you have drunk on my holy mountain, so will all the nations drink continually, they will drink, 
will drink greedily, but they will be as though they had never been! 

Oba 1:17 But on Mount Zion will be those who have escaped -it will be a sanctuary- and the House of Jacob will 
recover what is rightfully theirs. 

Oba 1:18 Then the House of Jacob will be a fire, the House of Joseph a flame, and the House of Esau like 
stubble. They will set it alight and burn it up, and no one of the House of Esau will survive. Yahweh has spoken. 
Oba 1:19 People from the Negeb will occupy the Mount of Esau, people from the lowlands the country of the 
Philistines; they will occupy Ephraim and Samaria, and Benjamin will occupy Gilead. 

Oba 1:20 The exiles of this army, the sons of Israel, will have the Canaanites’ land as far as Zarephthah, while 
the exiles from Jerusalem now in Sepharad will have the cities of the Negeb. 

Oba 1:21 Victorious, they will climb Mount Zion to rule over Mount Esau, and sovereignty will be Yahweh's! 

Jon 1:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to Jonah son of Amittai: 

Jon 1 :2 “Up!”. he said, “Go to Nineveh, the great city, and proclaim to them that their wickedness has forced itself 
upon me”. 

Jon 1 :3 Jonah set about running away from Yahweh, and going to Tarshish. He went down to Jaffa and found a 
ship bound for Tarshish; he paid his fare and boarded it, to go with them to Tarshish, to get away from Yahweh. 
Jon 1 :4 But Yahweh threw a hurricane at the sea, and there was such a great storm at sea that the ship 
threatened to break up. 

Jon 1 :5 The sailors took fright, and each of them called on his own god, and to lighten the ship they threw the 
cargo overboard. Jonah, however, had gone below, had lain down in the hold and was fast asleep, 

Jon 1 :6 when the boatswain went up to him and said, “What do you mean by sleeping? Get up! Call on your 
god! Perhaps he will spare us a thought and not leave us to die”. 

Jon 1 :7 Then they said to each other, “Come on, let us draw lots to find out who is to blame for bringing us this 
bad luck”. So they cast lots, and the lot pointed to Jonah. 

Jon 1 :8 Then they said to him, “Tell us, what is your business? Where do you come from? What is your country? 
What is your nationality?”. 

Jon 1 :9 He replied, “I am a Hebrew, and I worship Yahweh, God of Heaven, who made both sea and dry land”. 
Jon 1:10 The sailors were seized with terror at this and said, “Why ever did you do this?”. since they knew that he 
was trying to escape from Yahweh, because he had told them so. 

Jon 1:11 They then said, “What are we to do with you, to make the sea calm down for us?”. For the sea was 
growing rougher and rougher. 

Jon 1:12 He replied, “Take me and throw me into the sea, and then it will calm down for you. I know it is my fault 
that this great storm has struck you”. 

Jon 1:13 The sailors rowed hard in an effort to reach the shore, but in vain, since the sea was growing rougher 
and rougher. 

Jon 1:14 So at last they called on Yahweh and said, “O, Yahweh, do not let us perish for the sake of this man’s 
life, and do not hold us responsible for causing an innocent man’s death; for you, Yahweh, have acted as you 
saw fit”. 

Jon 1:15 And taking hold of Jonah they threw him into the sea; and the sea stopped raging. 

Jon 1:16 At this, the men were seized with dread of Yahweh; they offered a sacrifice to Yahweh and made vows 
to him. 



Jon 2:1 Now Yahweh ordained that a great fish should swallow Jonah; and Jonah remained in the belly of the 
fish for three days and three nights. 

Jon 2:2 From the belly of the fish, Jonah prayed to Yahweh, his God; he said: 

Jon 2:3 Out of my distress I cried to Yahweh and he answered me, from the belly of Sheol I cried out; you heard 
my voice! 

Jon 2:4 For you threw me into the deep, into the heart of the seas, and the floods closed round me. All your 
waves and billows passed over me; 

Jon 2:5 then I thought, “I am banished from your sight; how shall I ever see your holy Temple again?”. 

Jon 2:6 The waters round me rose to my neck, the deep was closing round me, seaweed twining round my 
head. 

Jon 2:7 To the roots of the mountains, I sank into the underworld, and its bars closed round me for ever. But you 
raised my life from the Pit, Yahweh my God! 

Jon 2:8 When my soul was growing ever weaker, Yahweh, I remembered you, and my prayer reached you in 
your holy Temple. 

Jon 2:9 Some abandon their faithful love by worshipping false gods, 

Jon 2:10 but I shall sacrifice to you with songs of praise. The vow I have made I shall fulfil! Salvation comes 
from Yahweh! 

Jon 2:1 1 Yahweh spoke to the fish, which then vomited Jonah onto the dry land. 

Jon 3:1 The word of Yahweh was addressed to Jonah a second time. 

Jon 3:2 “Up!”. he said, “Go to Nineveh, the great city, and preach to it as I shall tell you”. 

Jon 3:3 Jonah set out and went to Nineveh in obedience to the word of Yahweh. Now Nineveh was a city great 
beyond compare; to cross it took three days. 

Jon 3:4 Jonah began by going a day’s journey into the city and then proclaimed, “Only forty days more and 
Nineveh will be overthrown”. 

Jon 3:5 And the people of Nineveh believed in God; they proclaimed a fast and put on sackcloth, from the 
greatest to the least. 

Jon 3:6 When the news reached the king of Nineveh, he rose from his throne, took off his robe, put on sackcloth 
and sat down in ashes. 

Jon 3:7 He then had it proclaimed throughout Nineveh, by decree of the king and his nobles, as follows: “No 
person or animal, herd or flock, may eat anything; they may not graze, they may not drink any water. 

Jon 3:8 All must put on sackcloth and call on God with all their might; and let everyone renounce his evil ways 
and violent behaviour. 

Jon 3:9 Who knows? Perhaps God will change his mind and relent and renounce his burning wrath, so that we 
shall not perish”. 

Jon 3:10 God saw their efforts to renounce their evil ways. And God relented about the disaster which he had 
threatened to bring on them, and did not bring it. 

Jon 4:1 This made Jonah very indignant; he fell into a rage. 

Jon 4:2 He prayed to Yahweh and said, “Please, Yahweh, isn’t this what I said would happen when I was still in 
my own country? That was why I first tried to flee to Tarshish, since I knew you were a tender, compassionate 
God, slow to anger, rich in faithful love, who relents about inflicting disaster. 

Jon 4:3 So now, Yahweh, please take my life, for I might as well be dead as go on living”. 

Jon 4:4 Yahweh replied, “Are you right to be angry?”. 

Jon 4:5 Jonah then left the city and sat down to the east of the city. There he made himself a shelter and sat 
under it in the shade, to see what would happen to the city. 

Jon 4:6 Yahweh God then ordained that a castor-oil plant should grow up over Jonah to give shade for his head 
and soothe his ill-humour; Jonah was delighted with the castor-oil plant. 

Jon 4:7 But at dawn the next day, God ordained that a worm should attack the castor-oil plant - and it withered. 
Jon 4:8 Next, when the sun rose, God ordained that there should be a scorching east wind; the sun beat down 
so hard on Jonah’s head that he was overcome and begged for death, saying, “I might as well be dead as go on 
living”. 

Jon 4:9 God said to Jonah, “Are you right to be angry about the castor-oil plant?”. He replied, “I have every right 
to be angry, mortally angry!”. 

Jon 4:10 Yahweh replied, “You are concerned for the castor-oil plant which has not cost you any effort and 
which you did not grow, which came up in a night and has perished in a night. 

Jon 4:1 1 So why should I not be concerned for Nineveh, the great city, in which there are more than a hundred 
and twenty thousand people who cannot tell their right hand from their left, to say nothing of all the animals?”. 

Mic 1:1 The word of Yahweh which came to Micah of Moresheth during the reigns of Jotham, Ahaz and 
Hezekiah kings of Judah. His visions about Samaria and Jerusalem. 

Mic 1 :2 Listen, all you peoples, attend, earth and everyone on it! Yahweh intends to give evidence against you, 



the Lord, from his holy temple. 

Mic 1 :3 For look, Yahweh is leaving his home, down he comes, he treads the heights of earth. 

Mic 1 :4 Beneath him, the mountains melt, and valleys are torn open, like wax near a fire, like water pouring 
down a slope. 

Mic 1 :5 All this is because of the crime of Jacob, the sin of the House of Israel. What is the crime of Jacob? Is it 
not Samaria? What is the sin of the House of Judah? Is it not Jerusalem? 

Mic 1:6 Sol shall make Samaria a ruin in the open country, a place for planting vines. I shall send her stones 
rolling into the valley, until I have laid her foundations bare. 

Mic 1 :7 All her images will be shattered, all her earnings consumed by fire. I shall leave all her idols derelict- 
they were amassed out of prostitutes’ earnings and prostitutes’ earnings once more they will be. 

Mic 1 :8 This is why I shall howl and wail, why I shall go barefoot and naked, why I shall howl like the jackals, 
why I shall shriek like the owls; 

Mic 1 :9 for there is no cure for the wounds that Yahweh inflicts: the blow falls on Judah, it falls on the gateway of 
my people, on Jerusalem itself. 

Mic 1:10 Do not announce it in Gath, in … shed no tears! In Beth-Leaphrah roll in the dust! 

Mic 1:11 Sound the horn, inhabitant of Shaphir! She has not left her city, she who lives in Zaanan. Beth-Ezel is 
torn from its foundations, from its strong supports. 

Mic 1:12 What hope has she of happiness, she who lives in Maroth? Instead Yahweh sent down disaster on the 
gateway of Jerusalem itself! 

Mic 1:13 Harness the horse to the chariot, you inhabitant of Lachish! That is where the sin of the daughter of 
Zion began; the crimes of Israel can be traced to you! 

Mic 1:14 And so you must provide a dowry for Moresheth-Gath. Beth-Achzib will prove a disappointment for the 
kings of Israel. 

Mic 1:15 The plunderer will come to you again, you citizen of Mareshah! And into Adullam will vanish the glory 
of Israel. 

Mic 1:16 Off with your hair, shave your head, for the children that were your joy. Make yourselves bald like the 
vulture, for they have left you for exile. 

Mic 2:1 Disaster for those who plot evil, who lie in bed planning mischief! No sooner is it dawn than they do it, 
since they have the power to do so. 

Mic 2:2 Seizing the fields that they covet, they take over houses as well, owner and house they seize alike, the 
man himself as well as his inheritance. 

Mic 2:3 So Yahweh says this: Look, I am now plotting a disaster for this breed from which you will not extricate 
your necks; you will not hold your heads up then, for the times will be disastrous indeed. 

Mic 2:4 That day they will make a satire on you, they will strike up a dirge and say, “We have been stripped of 
everything; my people’s land has been divided up, no one else can restore it to them, our fields have been 
awarded to our despoiler”. 

Mic 2:5 Because of this, you will have no one to measure out a share in Yahweh’s community. 

Mic 2:6 “Do not drivel”, they drivel, “do not drivel like this! Disgrace will not overtake us! 

Mic 2:7 “Can the House of Jacob be accursed? Has Yahweh grown short-tempered? Is that his way of going to 
work? His prophecies can only be favourable for his people Israel!”. 

Mic 2:8 But you are the ones who play the enemy to my people. From the inoffensive man you snatch his cloak, 
on those who feel safe you inflict the damage of war. 

Mic 2:9 My people’s women you evict from the homes they love, and deprive the children of my glory for ever, 
Mic 2:10 saying, “Up and off with you! You can’t stay here!”. For a worthless thing you exact an extortionate 
pledge. 

Mic 2:11 If a man of the spirit came and invented this lie, “I prophesy wine and liquor for you”, he would be the 
prophet for a people like this. 

Mic 2:12 I shall assemble the whole of Jacob, I shall gather the remnant of Israel, I shall gather them together 
like sheep in an enclosure. And like a flock within their fold, they will bleat far away from anyone, 

Mic 2:13 their leader will break out first, then all break out through the gate and escape, with their king leading 
the way and with Yahweh at their head. 

Mic 3:1 Then I said, “Kindly listen, you leaders of the House of Jacob, you princes of the House of Israel. Surely 
you are the ones who ought to know what is right, 

Mic 3:2 and yet you hate what is good and love what is evil, skinning people alive, pulling the flesh off their 
bones, 

Mic 3:3 eating my people’s flesh, stripping off their skin, breaking up their bones, chopping them up small like 
flesh for the pot, like meat in the stew-pan?”. 

Mic 3:4 Then they will call to Yahweh, but he will not answer them. When the time comes he will hide his face 
from them because of the crimes they have committed. 



Mic 3:5 Yahweh says this against the prophets who lead my people astray: So long as they have something to 
eat they cry “Peace'. But on anyone who puts nothing into their mouths they declare war. 

Mic 3:6 And so, for you, night will be without vision and for you the darkness without divination. The sun will set 
for the prophets, the daylight will go black above them. 

Mic 3:7 Then the seers will be covered with shame, the diviners with confusion; they will all put their hands over 
their mouths because there is no answer from God. 

Mic 3:8 Not so with me, I am full of strength (full of Yahweh’s spirit), of the sense of right, of energy to accuse 
Jacob of his crime and Israel of his sin. 

Mic 3:9 Kindly listen to this, you leaders of the House of Jacob, you princes of the House of Israel, who detest 
justice, wresting it from its honest course, 

Mic 3:10 who build Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity! 

Mic 3:1 1 Her leaders give verdicts for presents, her priests take a fee for their rulings, her prophets divine for 
money and yet they rely on Yahweh! “Isn’t Yahweh among us?”. they say, “No disaster is going to overtake us”. 

Mic 3:12 That is why, thanks to you, Zion will become ploughland, Jerusalem a heap of rubble and the Temple 
Mount a wooded height. 

Mic 4:1 But in days to come Yahweh’s Temple Mountain will tower above the mountains, rise higher than the 
hills. 

Mic 4:2 Then the peoples will stream to it, then many nations will come and say, “Come, we will go up to 
Yahweh’s mountain, to the Temple of the God of Jacob, so that he may teach us his ways and we may walk in 
his paths; for the Law issues from Zion and Yahweh’s word from Jerusalem”. 

Mic 4:3 He will judge between many peoples and arbitrate between mighty nations. They will hammer their 
swords into ploughshares and their spears into bill-hooks. Nation will not lift sword against nation or ever again 
be trained to make war. 

Mic 4:4 But each man will sit under his vine and fig tree with no one to trouble him. The mouth of Yahweh 
Sabaoth has spoken. 

Mic 4:5 For all peoples go forward, each in the name of its god, while we go forward in the name of Yahweh our 
God for ever and ever. 

Mic 4:6 That day — declares Yahweh- 1 shall gather in the lame and bring together the strays and those whom I 
have treated harshly. 

Mic 4:7 From the footsore I shall make a remnant, and from the far-flung a mighty nation. And Yahweh will reign 
over them on Mount Zion thenceforth and for ever. 

Mic 4:8 And to you, Tower of the Flock, Ophel of the daughter of Zion, to you your former sovereignty will return, 
the royal power of the daughter of Jerusalem. 

Mic 4:9 Why are you crying out now? Have you no king? Has your counsellor perished, for pangs to grip you 
like those of a woman in labour? 

Mic 4:10 Writhe in pain and cry aloud, daughter of Zion, like a woman in labour, for now you must leave the city 
and camp in the open country; to Babylon you must go, and there you will be rescued; there Yahweh will ransom 
you from the clutches of your enemies. 

Mic 4:1 1 Now many nations have mustered against you. They say, “Let us desecrate her, let us gloat over Zion!”. 
Mic 4:12 But they do not know Yahweh’s thoughts, they do not understand his design: he has collected them 
like sheaves on the threshing-floor. 

Mic 4:13 Start your threshing, daughter of Zion, for I shall make your horn like iron, I shall make your hooves like 
bronze, so that you can crush many peoples. And you will devote what they have stolen to Yahweh, their wealth 
to the Lord of the whole earth. 

Mic 4:14 Now look to your fortifications, Fortress! They have laid siege to us; the ruler of Israel will be struck on 
the cheek with a rod. 

Mic 5:1 But you (Bethlehem) Ephrathah, the least of the clans of Judah, from you will come for me a future ruler 
of Israel whose origins go back to the distant past, to the days of old. 

Mic 5:2 Hence Yahweh will abandon them only until she who is in labour gives birth, and then those who survive 
of his race will be reunited to the Israelites. 

Mic 5:3 He will take his stand and he will shepherd them with the power of Yahweh, with the majesty of the 
name of his God, and they will be secure, for his greatness will extend henceforth to the most distant parts of the 
country. 

Mic 5:4 He himself will be peace! Should the Assyrian invade our country, should he set foot in our land, we 
shall raise seven shepherds against him, eight leaders of men; 

Mic 5:5 they will shepherd Assyria with the sword, the country of Nimrod with naked blade. He will save us from 
the Assyrian, should he invade our country, should he set foot inside our frontiers. 

Mic 5:6 Then what is left of Jacob, surrounded by many peoples, will be like a dew from Yahweh, like showers 
on the grass, which do not depend on human agency and are beyond human control. 



Mic 5:7 Then what is left of Jacob, surrounded by many peoples, will be like a lion among the forest beasts, like 
a fierce lion among flocks of sheep trampling as he goes, mangling his prey which no one takes from him. 

Mic 5:8 You will be victorious over your foes and all your enemies will be torn to pieces. 

Mic 5:9 When that day comes- declares Yahweh- 1 shall tear your horses away from you, I shall destroy your 
chariots; 

Mic 5:10 I shall tear the cities from your country, I shall overthrow all your fortresses; 

Mic 5:11 I shall tear the spells out of your hands and you will have no more soothsayers; 

Mic 5:12 I shall tear away your images and your sacred pillars from among you, and no longer will you worship 
things which your own hands have made! 

Mic 5:13 I shall uproot your sacred poles and shall destroy your cities! 

Mic 5:14 In furious anger I shall wreak vengeance on the nations who have disobeyed me! 

Mic 6:1 Now listen to what Yahweh says: “Stand up, state your case to the mountains and let the hills hear what 
you have to say!”. 

Mic 6:2 Listen, mountains, to the case as Yahweh puts it, give ear, you foundations of the earth, for Yahweh has 
a case against his people and he will argue it with Israel. 

Mic 6:3 “My people, what have I done to you, how have I made you tired of me? Answer me! 

Mic 6:4 For I brought you up from Egypt, I ransomed you from the place of slave-labour and sent Moses, Aaron 
and Miriam to lead you. 

Mic 6:5 My people, please remember: what was Balak king of Moab’s plan and how did Balaam son of Beor 
answer him? … from Shittim to Gilgal, for you to know Yahweh’s saving justice. 

Mic 6:6 “With what shall I enter Yahweh’s presence and bow down before God All-high? Shall I enter with burnt 
offerings, with calves one year old? 

Mic 6:7 Will he be pleased with rams by the thousand, with ten thousand streams of oil? Shall I offer my eldest 
son for my wrong-doing, the child of my own body for my sin? 

Mic 6:8 “You have already been told what is right and what Yahweh wants of you. Only this, to do what is right, 
to love loyalty and to walk humbly with your God”. 

Mic 6:9 Yahweh’s voice! He thunders to the city, “Listen, tribe of assembled citizens! 

Mic 6:10 Can I overlook the false measure, that abomination, the short bushel? 

Mic 6:11 Can I connive at rigged scales and at the bag of fraudulent weights? 

Mic 6:12 For the rich there are steeped in violence, and the citizens there are habitual liars. 

Mic 6:13 “I myself have therefore begun to strike you down, to bring you to ruin for your sins. 

Mic 6:14 You will eat but not be satisfied; you will store up but never keep safe; what you do keep safe I shall 
hand over to the sword; 

Mic 6:15 you will sow but will not reap, press the olive but will not rub yourself with oil, tread the grape but will 
not drink the wine. 

Mic 6:16 “For you keep the laws of Omri; what the House of Ahab did, you have done; by modelling yourselves 
on their standards, you force me to make an appalling example of you and reduce your citizens to a laughing- 
stock; hence you will endure the scorn of other peoples”. 

Mic 7:1 How wretched I am, a harvester in summer time, like a gleaner at the vintage: not a single cluster to eat, 
none of those early figs I love! 

Mic 7:2 The faithful have vanished from the land: there is no one honest left. All of them are on the alert for 
blood, every man hunting his brother with a net. 

Mic 7:3 Their hands are adept at wrong-doing: the official makes his demands, the judge gives judgement for a 
bribe, the man in power pronounces as he pleases. 

Mic 7:4 The best of them is like a briar, the most honest of them like a thorn-hedge. Now from the north their 
punishment approaches! That will be when they are confounded! 

Mic 7:5 Trust no neighbour, put no confidence in a friend; do not open your mouth to the wife who shares your 
bed. 

Mic 7:6 For son insults father, daughter rebels against mother, daughter-in-law against mother-in-law; a 
person’s enemies come from within the household itself. 

Mic 7:7 But I shall look to Yahweh, my hope is in the God who will save me; my God will hear me. 

Mic 7:8 Do not gloat over me, my enemy: though I have fallen, I shall rise; though I live in darkness, Yahweh is 
my light. 

Mic 7:9 I must endure Yahweh’s anger for I have sinned against him, until he takes up my cause and rights my 
wrongs; he will bring me out into the light, and then I shall contemplate his saving justice. 

Mic 7:10 When my enemy sees this, she will be covered with shame, having sneered, “Where is Yahweh your 
God?”. This time, I shall be watching as she is trampled underfoot like mud in the streets. 

Mic 7:1 1 That will be the day for rebuilding your walls! The day for expanding your frontiers! 

Mic 7:12 The day when others come to you all the way from Assyria, from Egypt, from Tyre and all the way from 



the Euphrates, from sea to sea, from the mountains to the mountains! 

Mic 7:13 The earth will become a desert by reason of its inhabitants, in return for what they have done. 

Mic 7:14 With shepherd’s crook lead your people to pasture, the flock that is your heritage, living confined in a 
forest with meadow land all round. Let them graze in Bashan and Gilead as in the days of old! 

Mic 7:15 As in the days when you came out of Egypt, grant us to see wonders! 

Mic 7:16 The nations will see and be confounded in spite of all their power; they will put their hands over their 
mouths, their ears will be deafened. 

Mic 7:17 They will lick the dust like snakes, like reptiles that crawl on the earth. They will creep trembling out of 
their lairs, in terror before you. 

Mic 7:18 What god can compare with you for pardoning guilt and for overlooking crime? He does not harbour 
anger for ever, since he delights in showing faithful love. 

Mic 7:19 Once more have pity on us, tread down our faults; throw all our sins to the bottom of the sea. 

Mic 7:20 Grant Jacob your faithfulness, and Abraham your faithful love, as you swore to our ancestors from the 
days of long ago. 

Nah 1:1 Prophecy about Nineveh. Book of the vision of Nahum of Elkosh. 

Nah 1:2 Yahweh is a jealous and vengeful God, Yahweh takes vengeance, he is rich in wrath; Yahweh takes 
vengeance on his foes, he stores up fury for his enemies. 

Nah 1 :3 Yahweh is slow to anger but great in power, Yahweh never lets evil go unpunished. In storm and 
whirlwind he takes his way, the clouds are the dust stirred up by his feet. 

Nah 1 :4 He rebukes the sea, dries it up, and makes all the rivers run dry… . Bashan and Carmel wither, the 
greenery of the Lebanon withers too. 

Nah 1:5 The mountains tremble before him, the hills reel; the earth collapses before him, the world and all who 
live in it. 

Nah 1 :6 His fury — who can withstand it? Who can endure his burning wrath? His anger pours out like fire and 
the rocks break apart before him. 

Nah 1 :7 Yahweh is better than a fortress in time of distress; he recognises those who trust in him 

Nah 1:8 even when the flood rushes on; he will make an end once and for all of those who defy him, and pursue 

his foes into darkness. 

Nah 1 :9 What are your thoughts about Yahweh? He it is who makes a final end: his adversaries will not rise up 
a second time; 

Nah 1:10 like a thicket of tangled brambles, like dry straw, they will be burnt up completely. To Assyria 
Nah 1:11 From you has emerged someöne plotting evil against Yahweh, one of Belial’s counsellors. To Judah 
Nah 1:12 Yahweh says this: Unopposed and many though they be, they will be cut down and pass away. 
Though I have made you suffer, I shall make you suffer no more, 

Nah 1:13 for now I shall break his yoke which presses hard on you and snap your chains. To the king of 
Nineveh 

Nah 1:14 As for you, this is Yahweh’s decree: You will have no heirs to your name, from the temple of your gods 
I shall remove carved image and cast image, and I shall devastate your tomb, for you are accursed! 

Nah 2:1 To Judah See on the mountains the feet of the herald! “Peace!”. he proclaims. Judah, celebrate your 
feasts, carry out your vows, for Belial will never pass through you again; he has been utterly destroyed. 

Nah 2:2 The destroyer has advanced on you, guarding the siege-works, watching the road, bracing himself, 
mustering great strength! 

Nah 2:3 (For Yahweh has restored the vine of Jacob, yes, the vine of Israel, although the plunderers had 
plundered them, although they had snapped off their vine-shoots!) 

Nah 2:4 The shields of his fighting men show red, his warriors are dressed in scarlet; the metal of the chariots 
sparkles as he prepares for battle; the horsemen are impatient for action; 

Nah 2:5 the chariots storm through the streets, jostling one another in the squares; they look like blazing flames, 
like lightning they dash to and fro. 

Nah 2:6 His captains are called out; stumbling as they go, they speed towards the wall, and the mantelet is put 
in position. 

Nah 2:7 The sluices of the River are opened, and the palace melts in terror. 

Nah 2:8 Beauty is taken captive, carried away, her slave-girls moaning like doves 

Nah 2:9 and beating their breasts. Nineveh is like a lake, whose waters are draining away. “Stop! Stop!”. But no 
one turns back. 

Nah 2:10 “Plunder the silver! Plunder the gold!”. There is no end to the treasure, a mass of everything you could 
desire! 

Nah 2:1 1 Ravaged, wrecked, ruined! Heart fails and knees give way, anguish is in the loins of all, and every 
face grows pale! 

Nah 2:12 Where is the lions’ den now, the cave of the lion’s whelps, where the lion and lioness walked with their 



cubs and no one molested them, 

Nah 2:13 where the lion would tear up food for his whelps and strangle the kill for his mates, where he filled his 
caverns with prey and his lairs with spoil? 

Nah 2:14 Look, I am against you!- declares Yahweh Sabaoth- 1 shall send your chariots up in smoke, and the 
sword will devour your whelps; I shall cut short your depredations on earth, and the voices of your envoys will be 
heard no more. 

Nah 3:1 Disaster to the city of blood, packed throughout with lies, stuffed with booty, where plundering has no 
end! 

Nah 3:2 The crack of the whip! The rumble of wheels! Galloping horse, jolting chariot, 

Nah 3:3 charging cavalry, flashing swords, gleaming spears, a mass of wounded, hosts of dead, countless 
corpses; they stumble over corpses- 

Nah 3:4 because of the countless whorings of the harlot, the graceful beauty, the cunning witch, who enslaved 
nations by her harlotries and tribes by her spells. 

Nah 3:5 Look, I am against you!- declares Yahweh Sabaoth- 1 shall lift your skirts as high as your face and show 
your nakedness to the nations, your shame to the kingdoms. 

Nah 3:6 I shall pelt you with filth, I shall shame you and put you in the pillory. 

Nah 3:7 Then all who look at you will shrink from you and say, “Nineveh has been ruined!”. Who will mourn for 
her? Where would I find people to comfort you? 

Nah 3:8 Are you better off than No-Amon situated among rivers, her defences the seas, her rampart the waters? 
Nah 3:9 In Ethiopia and Egypt lay her strength, and it was boundless; Put and the Libyans served in her army. 
Nah 3:10 But she too went into exile, into captivity; her little ones too were dashed to pieces at every crossroad; 
lots were drawn for her nobles, all her great men were put in chains. 

Nah 3:1 1 You too will become drunk, you will go into hiding; you too will have to search for a refuge from the 
enemy. 

Nah 3:12 Your fortifications are all fig trees, with early ripening figs: as soon as they are shaken, they fall into 
the mouth of the eater. 

Nah 3:13 Look at your people: you are a nation of women! The gates of your country gape open to your 
enemies; fire has devoured their bars! 

Nah 3:14 Draw yourselves water for the siege, strengthen your fortifications! Into the mud with you, puddle the 
clay, repair the brick-kiln! 

Nah 3:15 There the fire will burn you up, the sword will cut you down. Make yourselves as numerous as locusts, 
make yourselves as numerous as the hoppers, 

Nah 3:16 let your commercial agents outnumber the stars of heaven, 

Nah 3:17 your garrisons, like locusts, and your marshals, like swarms of hoppers! They settle on the walls when 
the day is cold. The sun appears, the locusts spread their wings, they fly away, away they fly, no one knows 
where. Alas, 

Nah 3:18 your shepherds are asleep, king of Assyria, your bravest men slumber; your people are scattered on 
the mountains with no one to gather them. 

Nah 3:19 There is no remedy for your wound, your injury is past healing. All who hear the news of you clap their 
hands at your downfall. For who has not felt your unrelenting cruelty? 

Hab 1:1 The charge that Habakkuk the prophet received in a vision. 

Hab 1 :2 How long, Yahweh, am I to cry for help while you will not listen; to cry, “Violence!”. in your ear while you 
will not save? 

Hab 1:3 Why do you make me see wrong-doing, why do you countenance oppression? Plundering and violence 
confront me, contention and discord flourish. 

Hab 1 :4 And so the law loses its grip and justice never emerges, since the wicked outwits the upright and so 
justice comes out perverted. 

Hab 1:5 Cast your eyes over the nations, look, and be amazed, astounded. For I am doing something in your 
own days which you will not believe if you are told of it. 

Hab 1:6 For look, I am stirring up the Chaldaeans, that fierce and fiery nation who march miles across country to 
seize the homes of others. 

Hab 1:7 They are dreadful and awesome, a law and authority to themselves. 

Hab 1 :8 Their horses are swifter than leopards, fiercer than wolves at night; their horsemen gallop on, their 
horsemen advance from afar, swooping like an eagle anxious to feed. 

Hab 1 :9 They are all bent on violence, their faces scorching like an east wind; they scoop up prisoners like 
sand. 

Hab 1:10 They scoff at kings, they despise princes. They make light of all fortresses: they heap up earth and 
take them. 

Hab 1:11 Then the wind changes and is gone … Guilty is he who makes his strength his god. 



Hab 1:12 Surely you, Yahweh, are from ancient times, my holy God, who never dies! Yahweh, you have 
appointed him to execute judgement; O Rock, you have set him firm to punish. 

Hab 1:13 Your eyes are too pure to rest on evil, you cannot look on at oppression. Why do you look on at those 
who play the traitor, why say nothing while the wicked swallows someöne more upright than himself? 

Hab 1:14 Why treat people like fish of the sea, like gliding creatures who have no leader? 

Hab 1:15 They haul them all up on their hook, they catch them in their net, they sweep them up in their dragnet 

and then make merry and rejoice. 

Hab 1:16 And so they offer a sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their dragnet, for by these they get a rich 
living and live off the fat of the land. 

Hab 1:17 Are they to go on emptying their net unceasingly, slaughtering the nations without pity? 

Hab 2:1 I shall stand at my post, I shall station myself on my watch-tower, watching to see what he will say to 

me, what answer he will make to my complaints. 

Hab 2:2 Then Yahweh answered me and said, “Write the vision down, inscribe it on tablets to be easily read. 
Hab 2:3 For the vision is for its appointed time, it hastens towards its end and it will not lie; although it may take 
some time, wait for it, for come it certainly will before too long. 

Hab 2:4 “You see, anyone whose heart is not upright will succumb, but the upright will live through faithfulness”. 
Hab 2:5 Now, surely, wealth is treacherous! He is arrogant, for ever on the move, with appetite as large as 
Sheol and as insatiable as Death, gathering in all the nations, and making a harvest of all peoples. 

Hab 2:6 Are not the peoples all bound to satirise and make up cryptic riddles about him? As for instance: 
Disaster to anyone who amasses goods not his (for how long?) and to anyone who weighs himself down with 
goods taken in pledge! 

Hab 2:7 Will not your creditors suddenly stand up, will not those who make you shiver wake up, and you will fall 
a prey to them? 

Hab 2:8 Since you have plundered many nations, all the nations that remain will plunder you, because of the 
bloodshed and violence done to the country, to the city and to all who live in it. 

Hab 2:9 Disaster to anyone who amasses ill-gotten gains for his house, so as to fix his nest on high and so 
evade the reach of misfortune! 

Hab 2:10 You have conspired to bring shame on your house: by overthrowing many peoples you have worked 
your own ruin. 

Hab 2:1 1 For the very stone will protest from the wall, and the beam will respond from the framework. 

Hab 2:12 Disaster to anyone who builds a town with bloodshed and founds a city on wrong-doing! 

Hab 2:13 Is it not thanks to Yahweh Sabaoth that the peoples’ toil is fuel for the fire, and the nations’ labour 
came to nothing? 

Hab 2:14 But the earth will be full of the knowledge of the glory of Yahweh as the waters cover the depths of the 
sea. 

Hab 2:15 Disaster to anyone who makes his neighbours drink, pouring out his poison until they are drunk, so 
that he can see them naked! 

Hab 2:16 You are full of shame, not glory! Your turn now to drink and show your foreskin. The cup in Yahweh’s 
right hand comes round to you, and disgrace will overshadow your glory. 

Hab 2:17 For the violence done to the Lebanon will overwhelm you and the massacre of animals will terrify you, 
because of the bloodshed and violence done to the country, to the city and to all who live in it. Disaster to 
anyone who says to the log, “Wake up!”, to the dumb stone, “On your feet!”. (This is the prophecy!) Look, he is 
encased in gold and silver, -but not a breath of life inside it! 

Hab 2:18 What use is a sculpted image that a sculptor should make it? - a metal image, a lying instructor! And 
why does the image-maker put his trust in it, that he should make dumb idols? 

Hab 2:19 

Hab 2:20 But Yahweh is in his holy Temple: let the whole earth be silent before him. 

Hab 3:1 A prayer of the prophet Habakkuk; tone as for dirges. 

Hab 3:2 Yahweh, I have heard of your renown; your work, Yahweh, inspires me with dread. Make it live again in 
our time, make it known in our time; in wrath remember mercy. 

Hab 3:3 Eloah comes from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount Paran. Pause His majesty covers the 
heavens, and his glory fills the earth. 

Hab 3:4 His brightness is like the day, rays flash from his hands, that is where his power lies hidden. 

Hab 3:5 Pestilence goes before him and Plague follows close behind. 

Hab 3:6 When he stands up, he makes the earth tremble, with his glance he makes the nations quake. And the 
eternal mountains are dislodged, the everlasting hills sink down, his pathway from of old. 

Hab 3:7 I saw the tents of Cushan in trouble, the tent-curtains of Midian shuddering. 

Hab 3:8 Yahweh, are you enraged with the rivers, are you angry with the sea, that you should mount your 
chargers, your rescuing chariots? 



Hab 3:9 You uncover your bow, and give the string its fill of arrows. PauseYou drench the soil with torrents; 

Hab 3:10 the mountains see you and tremble, great floods sweep by, the abyss roars aloud, lifting high its 
waves. 

Hab 3:1 1 Sun and moon stay inside their dwellings, they flee at the light of your arrows, at the flash of your 
lightning-spear. 

Hab 3:12 In rage you stride across the land, in anger you trample the nations. 

Hab 3:13 You marched to save your people, to save your anointed one; you wounded the head of the house of 
the wicked, laid bare the foundation to the rock. Pause 

Hab 3:14 With your shafts you pierced the leader of his warriors who stormed out with shouts of joy to scatter 
us, as if they meant to devour some poor wretch in their lair. 

Hab 3:15 With your horses you trampled through the sea, through the surging abyss! 

Hab 3:16 When I heard, I trembled to the core, my lips quivered at the sound; my bones became disjointed and 
my legs gave way beneath me. Calmly I await the day of anguish which is dawning on the people now attacking 
us. 

Hab 3:17 (For the fig tree is not to blossom, nor will the vines bear fruit, the olive crop will disappoint and the 
fields will yield no food; the sheep will vanish from the fold; no cattle in the stalls.) 

Hab 3:18 But I shall rejoice in Yahweh, I shall exult in God my Saviour. 

Hab 3:19 Yahweh my Lord is my strength, he will make my feet as light as a doe’s, and set my steps on the 
heights. For the choirmaster; on stringed instruments. 

Zep 1:1 The word of Yahweh which was addressed to Zephaniah son of Cushi, son of Gedaliah, son of 
Amariah, son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah son of Amon king of Judah. 

Zep 1 :2 I shall sweep away everything off the face of the earth, declares Yahweh. 

Zep 1 :3 I shall sweep away humans and animals, the birds of the air and the fish of the sea, I shall topple the 
wicked and wipe all people off the face of the earth -declares Yahweh. 

Zep 1 :4 I shall raise my hand against Judah and against all who live in Jerusalem, and from this place I will wipe 
out Baal’s remnant, the very name of his priests, 

Zep 1 :5 and those who prostrate themselves on the roofs before the array of heaven, and those who prostrate 
themselves before Yahweh but swear by Milcom, 

Zep 1 :6 and those who have turned their back on Yahweh, who do not seek Yahweh and do not consult him. 
Zep 1 :7 Silence before Lord Yahweh, for the Day of Yahweh is near! Yahweh has prepared a sacrifice, he has 
consecrated his guests. 

Zep 1:8 On the Day of Yahweh’s sacrifice, I shall punish the courtiers, the royal princes and all who dress in 
outlandish clothes. 

Zep 1 :9 On that day I shall punish all who go up the Step and fill the Temple of their lords, with violence and 
deceit. 

Zep 1:10 On that Day — declares Yahweh — uproar will be heard from the Fish Gate, wailing from the New 
Quarter and a great crash from the hills. 

Zep 1:11 Wail, you who live in the Hollow, for it is all over with the merchants, all the money-bags have been 
wiped out! 

Zep 1:12 When that time comes I shall search Jerusalem by lamplight and punish the men stagnating over the 
remains of their wine, who say in their hearts, “Yahweh can do nothing, either good or bad”. 

Zep 1:13 For this, their wealth will be looted and their houses laid in ruins; they will build houses but not live in 
them, they will plant vineyards but not drink their wine. 

Zep 1:14 The great Day of Yahweh is near, near, and coming with great speed. How bitter the sound of the Day 
of Yahweh, the Day when the warrior shouts his cry of war. 

Zep 1:15 That Day is a day of retribution, a day of distress and tribulation, a day of ruin and of devastation, a 
day of darkness and gloom, a day of cloud and thick fog, 

Zep 1:16 a day of trumpet blast and battle cry against fortified town and high corner-tower. 

Zep 1:17 I shall bring such distress on humanity that they will grope their way like the blind for having sinned 
against Yahweh. Their blood will be poured out like mud, yes, their corpses like dung; 

Zep 1:18 nor will their silver or gold be able to save them. On the Day of Yahweh’s anger, by the fire of his 
jealousy, the whole earth will be consumed. For he will destroy, yes, annihilate everyone living on earth. 

Zep 2:1 Gather together, gather together, nations without shame, 

Zep 2:2 before you are dispersed like chaff which disappears in a day; before Yahweh’s burning anger 
overtakes you (before the Day of Yahweh’s anger overtakes you). 

Zep 2:3 Seek Yahweh, all you humble of the earth, who obey his commands. Seek uprightness, seek humility: 
you may perhaps find shelter on the Day of Yahweh’s anger. 

Zep 2:4 For Gaza will be abandoned and Ashkelon reduced to ruins; Ashdod will be driven out in broad daylight 
and Ekron uprooted. 



Zep 2:5 Disaster to the members of the coastal league, to the nation of the Cherethites! This is the word of 
Yahweh against you: I shall subdue you, land of the Philistines, I shall destroy you till there are no inhabitants 
left; 

Zep 2:6 and the coastal league will be reduced to pasture land, to grazing grounds for shepherds and folds for 
sheep; 

Zep 2:7 and the league will belong to the remnant of the House of Judah; they will pasture their flocks there, at 
night they will rest in the houses of Ashkelon; for, when Yahweh their God has punished them, he will restore 
their fortunes. 

Zep 2:8 I have heard the taunt of Moab and the insults of the Ammonites, as they taunted my people and 
boasted of their own domains. 

Zep 2:9 For this, as I live — declares Yahweh Sabaoth, God of Israel — Moab will become like Sodom and the 
Ammonites like Gomorrah: a realm of nettles, a heap of salt, a desolation for ever. What is left of my people will 
plunder them, the survivors of my nation will take their heritage. 

Zep 2:10 This will be the price of their pride for having taunted and boasted over the people of Yahweh 
Sabaoth. 

Zep 2:1 1 Yahweh will be fearsome to them, for he will scatter all the gods of the earth, and they will bow down 
to him, each from his own place — all the islands of the nations. 

Zep 2:12 You Ethiopians too will be run through by my sword. 

Zep 2:13 He will raise his hand against the north and bring Assyria down in ruins; he will make Nineveh a waste, 
as dry as a desert. 

Zep 2:14 Flocks will rest inside there, so will wild animals; pelican and porcupine will nest round her cornices at 
night; the owl will hoot at the window and the raven croak on the doorstep — for the cedar has been torn down. 
Zep 2:15 This is what the city will be like, once living happy and carefree and thinking to itself, “I have no rival — 
not I!”. And what will it be now? A ruin, a lair for wild beasts to rest in, and everyone who passes by will whistle 
and throw up his hands. 

Zep 3:1 Disaster to the rebellious, the befouled, the tyrannical city! 

Zep 3:2 She has not listened to the call, she has not bowed to correction, she has not trusted in Yahweh, she 
has not drawn near to her God. 

Zep 3:3 The rulers she has are roaring lions, her judges are wolves of the wastelands which leave nothing over 
for the morning, 

Zep 3:4 her prophets are braggarts, impostors, her priests have profaned what is holy and violated the Law. 

Zep 3:5 Yahweh the Upright is in her, he does no wrong; morning by morning he gives judgement, each dawn 
unfailingly (but the wrong-doer knows no shame). 

Zep 3:6 I have exterminated the nations, their corner-towers lie in ruins; I have emptied their streets, no one 
walks through them; their cities have been destroyed and are now deserted and unpeopled. 

Zep 3:7 I thought, “At least you will fear me, at least you will bow to correction”, and none of the punishments I 
brought on them will disappear from their view. But no, it only made them more anxious to do whatever was 
corrupt. 

Zep 3:8 So wait for me — declares Yahweh — for the day when I rise as accuser, for I am determined to gather 
the nations, to assemble the kingdoms, and on you to vent my fury, the whole heat of my anger (for the whole 
earth will be devoured by the fire of my jealousy). 

Zep 3:9 Yes, then I shall purge the lips of the peoples, so that all may invoke the name of Yahweh and serve 
him shoulder to shoulder. 

Zep 3:10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants will bring me tribute. 

Zep 3:1 1 When that Day comes you will never again be ashamed of all the deeds with which you once rebelled 
against me, for I shall rid you of those who exult in your pride; never again will you strut on my holy mountain. 
Zep 3:12 But in you I shall leave surviving a humble and lowly people, 

Zep 3:13 and those who are left in Israel will take refuge in the name of Yahweh. They will do no wrong, will tell 
no lies; nor will a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths. But they will be able to graze and rest with no one to 
alarm them. 

Zep 3:14 Shout for joy, daughter of Zion, Israel, shout aloud! Rejoice, exult with all your heart, daughter of 
Jerusalem! 

Zep 3:15 Yahweh has repealed your sentence; he has turned your enemy away. Yahweh is king among you, 
Israel, you have nothing more to fear. 

Zep 3:16 When that Day comes, the message for Jerusalem will be: Zion, have no fear, do not let your hands 
fall limp. 

Zep 3:17 Yahweh your God is there with you, the warrior-Saviour. He will rejoice over you with happy song, he 
will renew you by his love, he will dance with shouts of joy for you, 

Zep 3:18 as on a day of festival. I have taken away your misfortune, no longer need you bear the disgrace of it. 



Zep 3:19 I am taking action here and now against your oppressors. When that time comes I will rescue the 
lame, and gather the strays, and I will win them praise and renown when I restore their fortunes. 

Zep 3:20 At that time I shall be your guide, at the time when I gather you in, I shall give you praise and renown 
among all the peoples of the earth when I restore your fortunes under your own eyes, declares Yahweh. 

Hag 1:1 In the second year of King Darius, on the first day of the sixth month, the word of Yahweh was 
addressed through the prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel governor of Judah and to Joshua son of 
Jehozadak the high priest as follows, 

Hag 1:2 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘This people says: The time has not yet come to rebuild the Temple of 
Yahweh’”. 

Hag 1:3 (And the word of Yahweh was addressed through the prophet Haggai, as follows,) 

Hag 1 :4 “Is this a time for you to live in your panelled houses, when this House lies in ruins? 

Hag 1:5 So now, Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘Think carefully about your behaviour. 

Hag 1:6 You have sown much and harvested little; you eat but never have enough, drink but never have your 
fill, put on clothes but feel no warmth. The wage-earner gets his wages only to put them in a bag with a hole in 
it.” 

Hag 1:7 Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘Think carefully about your behaviour. 

Hag 1 :8 Go up into the hills, fetch timber and rebuild the House; and I shall take pleasure in it and manifest my 
glory there — Yahweh says. 

Hag 1:9 The abundance you expected proved to be little. When you brought the harvest in, I blasted it. And 
why? - Yahweh Sabaoth declares. Because while my House lies in ruins, each of you is busy with his own 
house. 

Hag 1:10 That is why the sky has withheld the rain and the earth withheld its yield. 

Hag 1:11 I have called down drought on land and hills, on grain, on new wine, on olive oil and on all the produce 
of the ground, on humans and animals and all your labours’”. 

Hag 1:12 Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, Joshua son of Jehozadak the high priest and the entire remnant of the 
people, paid attention to the voice of Yahweh their God and to the words of the prophet Haggai, which Yahweh 
their God had sent him to deliver. And the people were filled with fear before Yahweh. 

Hag 1:13 Haggai, the messenger of Yahweh, then passed on Yahweh’s message to the people, “I am with you 
— declares Yahweh”. 

Hag 1:14 And Yahweh roused the spirit of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel governor of Judah, the spirit of Joshua 
son of Jehozadak the high priest and the spirit of the entire remnant of the people; they came and set to work in 
the Temple of Yahweh Sabaoth, their God. 

Hag 1:15 This was on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month. In the second year of King Darius, 

Hag 2:1 on the twenty-first day of the seventh month, the word of Yahweh was addressed through the prophet 
Haggai, as follows, 

Hag 2:2 “You are to speak to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel governor of Judah, to Joshua son of Jehozadak the 
high priest and to the remnant of the people. Say this, 

Hag 2:3 ‘Is there anyone left among you who saw this Temple in its former glory? And how does it look to you 
now? Does it not seem as though there is nothing there? 

Hag 2:4 But take courage now, Zerubbabell-Yahweh declares. Courage, Joshua son of Jehozadak high priest! 
Courage, all you people of the countryl-Yahweh declares. To work! I am with you — Yahweh Sabaoth declares- 
Hag 2:5 and my spirit is present among you. Do not be afraid! 

Hag 2:6 For Yahweh Sabaoth says this: A little while now, and I shall shake the heavens and the earth, the sea 
and the dry land. 

Hag 2:7 I shall shake all the nations, and the treasures of all the nations will flow in, and I shall fill this Temple 
with glory, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Hag 2:8 Mine is the silver, mine the gold!-Yahweh Sabaoth declares. 

Hag 2:9 The glory of this new Temple will surpass that of the old, says Yahweh Sabaoth, and in this place I shall 
give peace — Yahweh Sabaoth declares’”. 

Hag 2:10 On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of Yahweh was 
addressed to the prophet Haggai as follows, 

Hag 2:1 1 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘Ask the priests to give a ruling on this: 

Hag 2:12 If someöne is carrying consecrated meat in the fold of his gown and allows the fold to touch bread, 
broth, wine, oil or food of any kind, will that become holy?’”. The priests replied, “No”. 

Hag 2:13 Haggai then said, “If anyone rendered unclean by contact with a corpse touches any of these things, 
will that become unclean?”. The priests replied, “It will become unclean”. 

Hag 2:14 Haggai then spoke out. “It is the same with this people”, he said, “the same with this nation, in my view 
— Yahweh declares — the same with everything they turn their hands to; and whatever they offer here is unclean. 
Hag 2:15 “So now think carefully, today and henceforth: before one stone had been laid on another in the 



sanctuary of Yahweh, 

Hag 2:16 what state were you in? You would come to a twenty-measure heap and find only ten; you would 
come to a vat to draw fifty measures and find only twenty. 

Hag 2:17 Everything you turned your hands to, I struck with wind-blast, mildew and hail, and still you would not 
return to me — Yahweh declares. 

Hag 2:18 So think carefully, today and henceforth (from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the day 
the foundation of the sanctuary of Yahweh was laid, think carefully) 

Hag 2:19 if seed-corn is still short in the barn, and if vine and fig tree, pomegranate and olive tree still bear no 
fruit. “From today onwards I intend to bless you”. 

Hag 2:20 On the twenty-fourth day of the month the word of Yahweh was addressed a second time to Haggai, 
as follows, 

Hag 2:21 “Speak to Zerubbabel governor of Judah. Say this, ‘I am going to shake the heavens and the earth. 
Hag 2:22 I shall overturn the thrones of kingdoms and destroy the power of the kings of the nations. I shall 
overthrow the chariots and their crews; horses and their riders will fall, every one to the sword of his comrade. 
Hag 2:23 When that day comes — Yahweh Sabaoth declares — 1 shall take you, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel my 
servant — Yahweh declares — and make you like a signet ring. For I have chosen you — Yahweh Sabaoth 
declares’”. 

Zee 1:1 In the second year of Darius, in the eighth month, the word of Yahweh was addressed to the prophet 
Zechariah (son of Berechiah), son of Iddo, as follows, 

Zee 1 :2 “Yahweh was deeply angry with your ancestors. 

Zee 1:3 So say this to them, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Return to me — Yahweh Sabaoth declares — and I will 
return to you, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Zee 1 :4 Do not be like your ancestors when the prophets in the past cried to them: Yahweh Sabaoth says this: 
Turn back from your evil ways and evil deeds — they would not listen or pay attention to me — Yahweh declares. 
Zee 1 :5 Where are your ancestors now? And the prophets, do they live for ever? 

Zee 1:6 But did not my words and statutes, with which I had charged my servants the prophets, overtake your 
ancestors just the same?’”. So they repented and said, “Yahweh Sabaoth has treated us as he resolved to do, 
and as our ways and deeds deserved”. 

Zee 1 :7 On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month (the month of Shebat), in the second year of Darius, the 
word of Yahweh was addressed to the prophet Zechariah (son of Berechiah), son of Iddo, as follows, 

Zee 1:8 “I had a vision during the night. There was a man riding a red horse standing among the deep-rooted 
myrtles; behind him were other horses-red, chestnut and white. 

Zee 1 :9 I said, ‘What are these, my lord?’. And the angel who was talking to me said, ‘I will show you what they 
are’. 

Zee 1:10 The man standing among the myrtles then replied, ‘Those are they whom Yahweh has sent to patrol 
the world’. 

Zee 1:11 They reported to the angel of Yahweh as he stood among the myrtles, ‘We have been patrolling the 
world, and indeed the whole world is still and at peace’. 

Zee 1:12 The angel of Yahweh then spoke and said, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth, how long will you wait before taking pity 
on Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, on which you have inflicted your anger for the past seventy years?’. 

Zee 1:13 Yahweh then replied with kind and comforting words to the angel who was talking to me. 

Zee 1:14 The angel who was talking to me then said to me, ‘Make this proclamation: Yahweh Sabaoth says 
this: I am burning with jealousy for Jerusalem and Zion 

Zee 1:15 but am deeply angry with the nations now at ease; before, I was only mildly angry, but they contributed 
to the disaster. 

Zee 1:16 So now Yahweh says this: In compassion I have returned to Jerusalem; my Temple will be rebuilt 
there — Yahweh Sabaoth declares — and the measuring line will be stretched over Jerusalem. 

Zee 1:17 Make this proclamation too: Yahweh Sabaoth says this: My cities are once more to be very 
prosperous. Yahweh will comfort Zion once again, and again make Jerusalem his choice’”. 

Zee 2:1 Then, raising my eyes, I had a vision. It was this: There were four horns. 

Zee 2:2 I said to the angel who was talking to me, “What are these?”. He said to me, “These are the horns which 
scattered Judah (Israel) and Jerusalem”. 

Zee 2:3 Yahweh then showed me four smiths. 

Zee 2:4 And I said, “What are these coming to do?”. He said to me, “(Those horns scattered Judah so completely 
that no one dared to raise his head; but) these have come to terrify them, to throw down the horns of the nations 
who raised their horns over the land of Judah to scatter it”. 

Zee 2:5 Then, raising my eyes, I had a vision. There was a man with a measuring line in his hand. 

Zee 2:6 I asked him, “Where are you going?”. He said, “To measure Jerusalem, to calculate her width and length”. 
Zee 2:7 And then, while the angel who was talking to me walked away, another angel came out to meet him. 



Zee 2:8 He said to him, “Run, and tell that young man this, ‘Jerusalem is to remain unwalled, because of the 
great number of men and cattle inside. 

Zee 2:9 For I — Yahweh declares — shall be a wall of fire all round her and I shall be the Glory within her’”. 

Zee 2:10 Look out! Look out! Flee from the land of the north — Yahweh declares- for I have scattered you to the 
four winds of heaven — Yahweh declares. 

Zee 2:1 1 Look out! Make your escape, Zion, now living with the daughter of Babylon! 

Zee 2:12 For Yahweh Sabaoth says this, since the Glory commissioned me, about the nations who plundered 
you, “Whoëver touches you touches the apple of my eye. 

Zee 2:13 Now look, I shall wave my hand over them and they will be plundered by those whom they have 
enslaved”. Then you will know that Yahweh Sabaoth has sent me! 

Zee 2:14 Sing, rejoice, daughter of Zion, for now I am coming to live among you -Yahweh declares! 

Zee 2:15 And on that day many nations will be converted to Yahweh. Yes, they will become his people, and they 
will live among you. Then you will know that Yahweh Sabaoth has sent me to you! 

Zee 2:16 Yahweh will take possession of Judah, his portion in the Holy Land, and again make Jerusalem his 
choice. 

Zee 2:17 Let all people be silent before Yahweh, now that he is stirring from his holy Dwelling! 

Zee 3:1 He then showed me the high priest Joshua, standing before the angel of Yahweh, with Satan standing 
on his right to accuse him. 

Zee 3:2 The angel of Yahweh said to Satan, “May Yahweh rebuke you, Satan! May Yahweh rebuke you, since 
he has made Jerusalem his choice. Is not this man a brand snatched from the fire?”. 

Zee 3:3 Now Joshua was dressed in dirty clothes as he stood before the angel. 

Zee 3:4 The latter then spoke as follows to those who were standing before him, “Take off his dirty clothesand 
dress him in splendid robes 

Zee 3:5 and put a clean turban on his head”. So they put a clean turban on his head and dressed him in clean 
clothes, while the angel of Yahweh stood byand said, “You see, I have taken your guilt away”. 

Zee 3:6 The angel of Yahweh then made this declaration to Joshua, 

Zee 3:7 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘If you walk in my ways and keep my ordinances, you shall govern my 
house, you shall watch over my courts, and I will give you free access among those in attendance here. 

Zee 3:8 “So listen, High Priest Joshua, you and the colleagues over whom you preside — for they are an omen 
of things to come — for now I shall bring in my servant the Branch, and I shall remove this country’s guilt in a 
single day. 

Zee 3:9 For this is the stone which I have put before Joshua, a stone on which are seven eyes; and I myself 
shall cut the inscription on it — Yahweh Sabaoth declares’. 

Zee 3:10 On that day — Yahweh Sabaoth declares — invite each other to come under your vine and your fig 
tree’”. 

Zee 4:1 The angel who was talking to me came back and roused me as though rousing someöne who was 
asleep. 

Zee 4:2 And he asked me, “What do you see?”. I replied, “As I look, there is a lamp-stand entirely of gold with a 
bowl at the top of it; it holds seven lamps, with seven openings for the lamps on it. 

Zee 4:3 By it are two olive trees, one to the right and the other to the left”. 

Zee 4:4 I then said to the angel who was talking to me, “What are those things, my lord?”. 

Zee 4:5 The angel who was talking to me replied, “Do you not know what they are?”. I said, “No, my lord”. 

Zee 4:6 He then gave me this answer, “These seven are the eyes of Yahweh, which range over the whole world”. 
Zee 4:7 “What are you, great mountain? Beside Zerubbabel you shall become a plain! He will bring out the 
keystone while it is cheered with Hurrah! Hurrah!”. 

Zee 4:8 The word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Zee 4:9 “The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this Temple; his hands will finish it. (Then you will 
know that Yahweh Sabaoth has sent me to you.) 

Zee 4: 1 0 A day of little things, no doubt, but who would dare despise it? How they will rejoice when they see the 
chosen stone in the hands of Zerubbabel!”. 

Zee 4:1 1 Then I went on to ask him, “What is the meaning of these two olive trees, to right and left of the lamp- 
stand?”. 

Zee 4: 1 2 (And I went on to ask him further, “What is the meaning of the two olive branches discharging oil 
through the two golden openings?') 

Zee 4:13 He replied, “Do you not know what they are?”. I said, “No, my lord”. 

Zee 4:14 He said, “These are the two anointed ones in attendance on the Lord of the whole world. This is the 
word of Yahweh with regard to Zerubbabel, “Not by might and not by power, but by my spirit” — says Yahweh 
Sabaoth. 

Zee 5:1 Again raising my eyes, I had a vision. There was a flying scroll. 



Zee 5:2 The angel who was talking to me said, “What do you see?”. I replied, “I see a flying scroll; it is twenty 
cubits long and ten cubits wide”. 

Zee 5:3 He then said to me, “This is God’s curse sweeping across the face of the whole country; for, according 
to what it says on one side, every thief will be banished and, according to what it says on the other, everyone 
who commits perjury in my name will be banished from it. 

Zee 5:4 I am going to release it — Yahweh Sabaoth declares — for it to enter the house of the thief and of 
anyone who commits perjury in my name, for it to settle deep within his house and consume it, timber, stone and 
all”. 

Zee 5:5 The angel who was talking to me appeared and said to me, “Raise your eyes, and see what this is, 
going along”. 

Zee 5:6 I said, “What is it?”. He said, “It is a bushel measure going along”. He went on, “This is their guilt 
throughout the country”. 

Zee 5:7 At this, a disc of lead was raised, and I saw a woman sitting inside the barrel. 

Zee 5:8 He said, “This is Wickedness”. And he rammed her back into the barrel and jammed its mouth shut with 
the mass of lead. 

Zee 5:9 I raised my eyes, and there were two women appearing. The wind caught their wings — they had wings 
like a stork's; they raised the barrel midway between earth and heaven. 

Zee 5:10 I then said to the angel who was talking to me, “Where are they taking the barrel?”. 

Zee 5:1 1 He replied, “To build a temple for it in the land of Shinar and make a pedestal on which to put it”. 

Zee 6:1 Again I raised my eyes, and this is what I saw: four chariots coming out between two mountains, and 
the mountains were mountains of bronze. 

Zee 6:2 The first chariot had red horses, the second chariot had black horses, 

Zee 6:3 the third chariot had white horses and the fourth chariot had vigorous, piebald horses. 

Zee 6:4 I asked the angel who was talking to me, “What are these, my lord?”. 

Zee 6:5 The angel replied, “They are the four winds of heaven now leaving, after attending the Lord of the whole 
world. 

Zee 6:6 The black horses are leaving for the land of the north; the white are following them, and the piebald are 
leaving for the land of the south”. 

Zee 6:7 They came out vigorously, eager to patrol the world. He said to them, “Go and patrol the world”. And 
they patrolled the world. 

Zee 6:8 He called to me and said, “Look, the ones going to the land of the north brought my spirit to rest on the 
land of the north”. 

Zee 6:9 Then the word of Yahweh was addressed to me as follows, 

Zee 6:10 “Collect silver and gold from the exiles, from Heldai, Tobijah and Jedaiah, then (you yourself go the 
same day) go to the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah, who has arrived from Babylon. 

Zee 6:1 1 Then, taking the silver and gold, make a crown and place it on the head of the high priest Joshua son 
of Jehozadak. 

Zee 6:12 And say this to him, ‘Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Here is a man whose name is Branch; where he is, 
there will be a branching out (and he will rebuild Yahweh’s sanctuary). 

Zee 6:13 Yes, he is the one who will rebuild Yahweh’s sanctuary; he will wear the royal insignia and sit on his 
throne and govern, with a priest on his right. Perfect peace will reign between these two. 

Zee 6:14 And the crown will serve Heldai, Tobijah, Jedaiah and the son of Zephaniah as a memorial of favour in 
Yahweh’s sanctuary. 

Zee 6: 1 5 And those now far away will come and work on the building of Yahweh’s sanctuary’. “Then you will 
know that Yahweh Sabaoth has sent me to you. It will happen if you diligently obey the voice of Yahweh your 
God”. 

Zee 7:1 In the fourth year of King Darius, the word of Yahweh was addressed to Zechariah on the fourth day of 
the ninth month, the month of Chislev. 

Zee 7:2 Bethel sent Sharezer with a deputation to entreat Yahweh’s favour 

Zee 7:3 and to ask the priests in the Temple of Yahweh Sabaoth and the prophets, “Ought I to go on mourning 
and fasting in the fifth month as I have been doing for so many years past?”. 

Zee 7:4 Then the word of Yahweh Sabaoth was addressed to me as follows, 

Zee 7:5 “Say to all the people of the country and to the priests, ‘While you have been fasting and mourning in 
the fifth and seventh months for the past seventy years, have you really been fasting for my sake? 

Zee 7:6 And when you were eating and drinking, were you not eating and drinking for your own sake? 

Zee 7:7 Do you not know the words which Yahweh proclaimed through the prophets in the past, when 
Jerusalem was inhabited and secure, as were her surrounding towns, and when the Negeb and the lowlands 
were inhabited?’”. ( 

Zee 7:8 The word of Yahweh was addressed to Zechariah as follows, 



Zee 7:9 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this.) He said, ‘Apply the law fairly, and show faithful love and compassion 
towards one another. 

Zee 7:10 Do not oppress the widow and the orphan, the foreigner and the poor, and do not secretly plan evil 
against one another’. 

Zee 7:1 1 But they would not listen; they turned a rebellious shoulder; they stopped their ears rather than hear; 
Zee 7:12 they made their hearts adamant rather than listen to the teaching and the words that Yahweh Sabaoth 
had sent — by his spirit — through the prophets in the past; and consequently the fury of Yahweh Sabaoth 
overtook them. 

Zee 7:13 And so, since when he called they would not listen, ‘I would not listen when they called’, says Yahweh 
Sabaoth, 

Zee 7:14 ‘but scattered them among all the nations unknown to them. Hence, after they had gone, the country 
was deserted, and no one came or went. They had turned a land of delights into a desert’”. 

Zee 8:1 The word of Yahweh Sabaoth came as follows: 

Zee 8:2 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: I have been burning with jealousy for Zion, with furious jealousy for her 
sake. 

Zee 8:3 Yahweh says this: I am coming back to Zion and shall live in the heart of Jerusalem. Jerusalem will be 
called Faithful City and the mountain of Yahweh Sabaoth, the Holy Mountain. 

Zee 8:4 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Aged men and women once again will sit in the squares of Jerusalem, each 
with a stick to lean on because of their great age. 

Zee 8:5 And the squares of the city will be full of boys and girls playing there. 

Zee 8:6 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: If this seems a miracle to the remnant of this people (in those days), will it 
seem one to me? declares Yahweh. 

Zee 8:7 Yahweh Sabaoth says this: Look, I shall rescue my people from the countries of the east and from the 
countries of the west. 

Zee 8:8 I shall bring them back to live in the heart of Jerusalem, and they will be my people and I shall be their 
God, faithful and just. 

Zee 8:9 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘Take heart, you who today hear these promises uttered by the prophets 
since the day when the foundations of the Temple of Yahweh Sabaoth were laid, that the sanctuary would 
indeed be rebuilt. 

Zee 8:10 For up to now, men were not paid their wages and nothing was paid for the animals either; and it has 
not been safe for anyone to come and go, because of the enemy, since I had set each one against everyone 
else. 

Zee 8:1 1 But from now on, I shall not treat the remnant of this people as I have treated them in time past — 
declares Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Zee 8:12 Now they will sow in peace; the vine will give its fruit, the soil will give its produce and heaven will give 
its dew. I shall bestow all these on the remnant of this people. 

Zee 8:13 Just as once you were a curse among the nations, House of Judah and House of Israel, so now I shall 
save you, and you will be a blessing. Do not be afraid. Take heart!’. 

Zee 8:14 “For Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘Just as I resolved to ill-treat you when your ancestors provoked me to 
anger and did not relent — says Yahweh Sabaoth- 

Zec 8:15 so now I have changed my mind and intend to treat Jerusalem and the House of Judah well. Do not be 
afraid! 

Zee 8: 1 6 ‘These are the things that you must do. Speak the truth to one another; at your gates, administer fair 
judgement conducive to peace; 

Zee 8:17 do not secretly plot evil against one another; do not love perjury; since I hate all this — Yahweh 
declares’. ’ 

Zee 8:18 The word of Yahweh Sabaoth was addressed to me as follows: 

Zee 8:19 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘The fast of the fourth month, the fast of the fifth, the fast of the seventh 
and the fast of the tenth are to become glad, joyful, happy festivals for the House of Judah. So love truth and 
peace!’”. 

Zee 8:20 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘In the future, peoples and citizens of many cities will come; 

Zee 8:21 and citizens of one city will go to the next and say: We must certainly go to entreat Yahweh’s favour 
and seek out Yahweh Sabaoth; I am going myself. 

Zee 8:22 Yes, many peoples and great nations will seek out Yahweh Sabaoth in Jerusalem and entreat 
Yahweh’s favour’. 

Zee 8:23 “Yahweh Sabaoth says this, ‘In those days, ten men from nations of every language will take a Jew by 
the sleeve and say: We want to go with you, since we have learnt that God is with you’”. 

Zee 9:1 A proclamation. The word of Yahweh is against Hadrach, it has come to rest on Damascus, for the 
source of Aram belongs to Yahweh no less than all the tribes of Israel; 



Zee 9:2 on Hamath too, which borders on it, and on (Tyre and) Sidon, despite her acumen. 

Zee 9:3 Tyre has built herself a fortress, has heaped up silver like dust and gold like the dirt of the streets. 

Zee 9:4 And now the Lord is going to dispossess her; at sea he will break her power, and she herself will go up 
in flames. 

Zee 9:5 Seeing this, Ashkelon will be terrified, Gaza too, and writhe with grief, Ekron too, at the ruin of her 
prospects; the king will vanish from Gaza and Ashkelon be unpeopled, 

Zee 9:6 while a half-breed will live in Ashdod! Yes, I shall destroy the pride of the Philistine; 

Zee 9:7 I shall snatch his blood from his mouth, his abominations from between his teeth. But his remnant too 
will belong to our God, becoming like a clan in Judah, and Ekron will become like a Jebusite. 

Zee 9:8 I shall stand guard before my home to defend it against all comers, and no oppressor will overrun them 
ever again, for now I am on the alert. 

Zee 9:9 Rejoice heart and soul, daughter of Zion! Shout for joy, daughter of Jerusalem! Look, your king is 
approaching, he is vindicated and victorious, humble and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey. 

Zee 9:10 He will banish chariots from Ephraim and horses from Jerusalem; the bow of war will be banished. He 
will proclaim peace to the nations, his empire will stretch from sea to sea, from the River to the limits of the earth. 
Zee 9:1 1 As for you, because of the blood of your covenant I have released your prisoners from the pit in which 
there is no water. 

Zee 9:12 Come back to the fortress, you prisoners waiting in hope. This very day, I vow, I shall make it up to you 
twice over. 

Zee 9:13 For I have strung Judah as a bow for myself, laid Ephraim on the string as an arrow, have roused your 
sons, Zion, against your sons, Javan, and have made you like a warrior’s sword. 

Zee 9:14 Then Yahweh will appear above them and his arrow will flash out like lightning. (The Lord) Yahweh will 
sound the trumpet and advance in the storm-winds of the south. 

Zee 9:15 Yahweh Sabaoth will protect them! They will devour, will trample on the sling-stones, they will drink 
blood like wine, awash like bowls, like the corners of the altar. 

Zee 9:16 Yahweh their God will give them victory when that day comes, like the sheep who are his people; yes, 
the stones of a diadem will sparkle over his country. 

Zee 9:17 How fine, how splendid that will be, with wheat to make the young men flourish, and new wine the 
maidens! 

Zee 10:1 Ask Yahweh for rain in autumn and at the time of the spring rains. Yahweh is the one to make the 
storm-clouds. He will give them showers of rain; to each, grass in his field. 

Zee 10:2 Since the domestic idols have talked nonsense, and the diviners have seen false signs, and dreams 
have purveyed delusions, affording empty comfort, that is why they have strayed like sheep, in distress for want 
of a shepherd. 

Zee 10:3 My anger has been roused by the shepherds, and I shall vent it on the he-goats. When Yahweh 
Sabaoth comes to visit his flock, the House of Judah, he will make it his royal war-horse. 

Zee 10:4 From it will emerge Cornerstone and Tent-peg, from it, Bow-ready-for-Battle, from it, every type of 
leader. Together 

Zee 10:5 they will be like warriors trampling the dirt of the streets in battle; when they fight, because Yahweh is 
with them, they will put mounted men to rout. 

Zee 10:6 Then I shall make the House of Judah mighty and the House of Joseph victorious. I shall restore them, 
because I have taken pity on them, and they will be as though I had never cast them off, for I am Yahweh their 
God and shall answer their prayer. 

Zee 10:7 Ephraim will be like a warrior. Their hearts will be cheered as though by wine. Their children will see 
this and rejoice, their hearts will exult in Yahweh. 

Zee 10:8 I shall whistle to them and gather them in, for I have redeemed them; they will be as numerous as they 
used to be. 

Zee 10:9 I shall scatter them among the peoples but in distant countries they will remember me, they will instruct 
their children and then return. 

Zee 10:10 I shall bring them home from Egypt and gather them back from Assyria; I shall lead them into Gilead 
and the Lebanon, and even that will not be large enough for them. 

Zee 10:1 1 They will cross the sea of Egypt (and the waves of the sea will be struck); all the depths of the River 
will be dried up. The arrogance of Assyria will be cast down and the sceptre of Egypt taken away. 

Zee 10:12 I shall make them mighty in Yahweh, and they will march in my name — Yahweh declares. 

Zee 11:1 Open your gateways, Lebanon, and the fire shall burn down your cedar trees! 

Zee 1 1 :2 Wail, juniper, for the cedar tree has fallen, the majestic ones have been ravaged! Wail, oaks of 
Bashan, for the impenetrable forest has been felled! 

Zee 1 1 :3 The sound of the wailing of shepherds! Their majesty has been ravaged. The sound of the roaring of 
young lions! The pride of the Jordan has been ravaged. 



Zee 1 1 :4 Yahweh my God says this, “Pasture the sheep for slaughter, 

Zee 1 1 :5 whose buyers kill them and go unpunished, whose sellers say of them, ‘Blessed be Yahweh; now I am 
rich!’. and whose own shepherds show them no pity. 

Zee 1 1 :6 For I shall show no further pity for the inhabitants of the country — Yahweh declares! Instead, I shall 
put everyone into the clutches of a neighbour, into the clutches of the king. They will crush the country and I shall 
not rescue anyone from their clutches”. 

Zee 1 1 :7 Then I pastured for slaughter the sheep belonging to the sheep-dealers. I took two staves: the one I 
called “Goodwill”, the other “Couplers”; and I pastured the sheep myself, 

Zee 1 1 :8 getting rid of three shepherds in one month. But I lost patience with them, and they equally detested 
me. 

Zee 11:91 then said, “I am not going to pasture you any more; the one doomed to die can die; the one doomed 
to perish can perish; and the rest can devour one another”. 

Zee 11:10 I then took my staff, “Goodwill”, and broke it in half, to break my covenant, which I had made with all 
the peoples. 

Zee 11:11 When it was broken, that day the sheep-dealers, who were watching me, realised that this had been 
a word of Yahweh. 

Zee 11:12 I then said to them, “If you see fit, give me my wages; if not, never mind”. So they weighed out my 
wages: thirty shekels of silver. 

Zee 11:13 Yahweh said to me, “Throw it to the smelter, this princely sum at which they have valued me!”. Taking 
the thirty shekels of silver, I threw them into the Temple of Yahweh, for the smelter. 

Zee 11:14 I then broke my second staff, “Couplers”, in half, to rupture the brotherly relationship between Judah 
and Israel. 

Zee 11:15 Next, Yahweh said to me, “This time, take the gear of a good-for-nothing shepherd. 

Zee 11:16 For I am now going to raise a shepherd in this country, who will not bother about the lost, who will not 
go in search of the stray, who will not heal the injured, who will not support the swollen, but who will eat the meat 
of the fat ones, tearing off their very hoofs. 

Zee 11:17 Disaster to the shepherd who deserts his flock! May the sword attack his arm and his right eye! May 
his arm shrivel completely and his right eye be totally blinded!”. 

Zee 12:1 A proclamation. The word of Yahweh about Israel (and also about Judah). Yahweh, who spread out 
the heaven and founded the earth and formed the human spirit within, declares: 

Zee 12:2 “Look, I shall make Jerusalem a cup to set all the surrounding peoples reeling. (That will be at the time 
of the siege of Jerusalem.) 

Zee 12:3 “When that day comes, I shall make Jerusalem a stone too heavy for all the peoples to lift; all those 
who try to lift it will hurt themselves severely, although all the nations of the world will be massed against her. 

Zee 12:4 When that day comes — declares Yahweh - I shall strike all the horses with panic and their riders with 
madness. And I shall strike all the peoples with blindness. (But I shall keep watch over Judah.) 

Zee 12:5 Then the rulers of Judah will say to themselves, ‘The strength of the inhabitants of Jerusalem lies in 
Yahweh Sabaoth their God’. 

Zee 12:6 When that day comes, I shall make the rulers of Judah like a brazier burning in a pile of wood, like a 
torch flaming in a sheaf; and they will devour all the peoples round them to right and left. And Jerusalem will be 
full of people as before, where she stands (in Jerusalem). 

Zee 12:7 Yahweh will first save the tents of Judah, so that the glory of the House of David and the glory of the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem do not increase at Judah’s expense. 

Zee 12:8 When that day comes, Yahweh will protect the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and the frailest of them will be 
like David when that day comes, and the House of David will be like God, like the angel of Yahweh, at their 
head. 

Zee 12:9 “When that day comes, I shall set about destroying all the nations who advance against Jerusalem. 

Zee 12:10 But over the House of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem I shall pour out a spirit of grace and 
prayer, and they will look to me. They will mourn for the one whom they have pierced as though for an only child, 
and weep for him as people weep for a first-born child. 

Zee 12:11 When that day comes, the mourning in Jerusalem will be as great as the mourning for Hadad 
Rimmon in the Plain of Megiddo. 

Zee 12:12 And the country will mourn clan by clan: The clan of the House of David by itself, and their women by 
themselves; the clan of the House of Nathan by itself, and their women by themselves; 

Zee 12:13 the clan of the House of Levi by itself, and their women by themselves; the clan of the House of 
Shimei by itself, and their women by themselves; 

Zee 12:14 all the rest of the clans, every clan by itself, and their women by themselves”. 

Zee 13:1 “When that day comes, a fountain will be opened for the House of David and the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, to wash sin and impurity away. 



Zee 13:2 “When that day comes — Yahweh declares — I shall cut off the names of the idols from the country, and 
they will never be remembered again; I shall also rid the country of the prophets, and of the spirit of impurity. 

Zee 13:3 Then, if anyone still goes on prophesying, his parents, his own father and mother will say to him, ‘You 
shall not live, since you utter lies in Yahweh’s name’. And even while he is prophesying, his parents, his own 
father and mother will pierce him through. 

Zee 13:4 When that day comes, the prophets will all be ashamed to relate their visions when they prophesy and 
no longer put on their hair cloaks with intent to deceive. 

Zee 13:5 Instead, they will say, ‘I am no prophet. I am a man who tills the soil, for the land has been my living 
since I was a boy’. 

Zee 13:6 And if anyone asks him, ‘What are those gashes on your chest?’. he will reply, ‘I got them when I was 
with my friends’”. 

Zee 13:7 Awake, sword, against my shepherd, against the man who is close to me- declares Yahweh Sabaoth! 
Strike the shepherd, scatter the sheep! And I shall turn my hand against the young! 

Zee 13:8 So it will be, throughout the country- declares Yahweh Sabaoth- two-thirds in it will be cut off (be killed) 
and the other third will be left. 

Zee 13:9 I shall pass this third through the fire, refine them as silver is refined, test them as gold is tested. He 
will call on my name and I shall answer him; I shall say, “He is my people”, and he will say, “Yahweh is my God!”. 
Zee 14:1 Look, the Day of Yahweh is coming, when the spoils taken from you will be shared out among you. 

Zee 14:2 For I shall gather all the nations to Jerusalem for battle. The city will be taken, the houses plundered, 
the women ravished. Half the city will go into exile, but the rest of the people will not be ejected from the city. 

Zee 14:3 Then Yahweh will sally out and fight those nations as once he fought on the day of battle. 

Zee 14:4 When that day comes, his feet will rest on the Mount of Olives, which faces Jerusalem on the east, 
and the Mount of Olives will be split in half from east to west, forming a huge valley; half the Mount will recede 
northwards, the other half southwards. 

Zee 14:5 The valley between the hills will be filled in, yes, it will be blocked as far as Jasol, it will be filled in as it 
was by the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. And Yahweh my God will come, and all the holy 
ones with him. 

Zee 14:6 That Day, there will be no light, but only cold and frost. 

Zee 14:7 And it will be one continuous day — Yahweh knows — there will be no more day and night, and it will 
remain light right into the time of evening. 

Zee 14:8 When that Day comes, living waters will issue from Jerusalem, half towards the eastern sea, half 
towards the western sea; they will flow summer and winter. 

Zee 14:9 Then Yahweh will become king of the whole world. When that Day comes, Yahweh will be the one and 
only and his name the one name. 

Zee 14:10 The entire country will be transformed into plain, from Geba to Rimmon in the Negeb, but Jerusalem 
will stand high in her place and be full of people from the Benjamin Gate to the site of the earlier gate, to the 
Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Hananel to the king’s wine-presses. 

Zee 14:11 People will make their homes there. The curse of destruction will be lifted; Jerusalem will be safe to 
live in. 

Zee 14:12 And this is the plague with which Yahweh will strike all the nations who have fought against 
Jerusalem; their flesh will rot while they are still standing on their feet; their eyes will rot in their sockets; their 
tongues will rot in their mouths. 

Zee 14:13 When that Day comes, a great terror will fall on them from Yahweh; each man will grab his 
neighbour’s hand and they will fall to fighting among themselves. 

Zee 14:14 Even Judah will fight against Jerusalem. The wealth of all the surrounding nations will be heaped 
together: gold, silver, clothing, in vast quantity. 

Zee 14:15 And the plague afflicting the horses, mules, camels, donkeys and all the other animals in those 
armies will be the same. 

Zee 14:16 After this, all the survivors of all the nations which have attacked Jerusalem will come up year after 
year to worship the King, Yahweh Sabaoth, and to keep the feast of Shelters. 

Zee 14:17 Should one of the races of the world fail to come up to Jerusalem to worship the King, Yahweh 
Sabaoth, there will be no rain for that one. 

Zee 14:18 Should the race of Egypt fail to come up and pay its visit, on it will fall the plague which Yahweh will 
inflict on each of those nations which fail to come up to keep the feast of Shelters. 

Zee 14:19 Such will be the punishment for Egypt and the punishment for all the nations which fail to come up to 
keep the feast of Shelters. 

Zee 14:20 When that Day comes, the very bells on the horses will be inscribed with the words, “Sacred to 
Yahweh”, and the cooking pots of the house of Yahweh will be as holy as the sprinkling bowls before the altar. 
Zee 14:21 Yes, every cooking pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be sacred to Yahweh Sabaoth, and all who 



come to offer sacrifice will help themselves and do their cooking in them, and there will be no more traders in the 
Temple of Yahweh Sabaoth, when that Day comes. 

Mai 1:1 A message. The word of Yahweh to Israel through Malachi. 

Mai 1 :2 “I have loved you, says Yahweh. But you ask, ‘How have you shown your love?’. Was not Esau Jacob’s 
brother? declares Yahweh; even so, I loved Jacob 

Mai 1 :3 but I hated Esau. I turned his mountains into a desert and his heritage into dwellings in the wastelands. 
Mai 1 :4 If Edom says, ‘We have been struck down but we shall rebuild our ruins’, Yahweh Sabaoth says this, 
‘Let them build, but I shall pull down! They will be known as Land of Wickedness and Nation-with-which- 
Yahweh-is-angry-for-ever. 

Mai 1:5 You will see this yourselves and you will say: Yahweh is mighty beyond the borders of Israel’. 

Mai 1 :6 “The son honours his father, the slave stands in awe of his master. But if I am indeed father, where is 
the honour due to me? And if I am indeed master, where is the awe due to me? says Yahweh Sabaoth to you 
priests who despise my name. You ask, ‘How have we despised your name?’. 

Mai 1:7 By putting polluted food on my altar. You ask, ‘How have we polluted you?’. By saying, ‘The table of 
Yahweh deserves no respect’. 

Mai 1 :8 When you bring blind animals for sacrifice, is this not wrong? When you bring the lame and the 
diseased, is this not wrong? If you offer them to your governor, see if he is pleased with them or receives you 
graciously, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 1 :9 In that case, try pleading with God to take pity on us (that is what you have done), and will he take any 
notice? says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 1:10 Why does one of you not close the doors and so stop the pointless lighting of fires on my altar? I am 
not pleased with you, says Yahweh Sabaoth; from your hands I find no offerings acceptable. 

Mai 1:11 But from farthest east to farthest west my name is great among the nations, and everywhere incense 
and a pure gift are offered to my name, since my name is great among the nations, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 1:12 “But you have profaned it by saying, ‘The table of the Lord is polluted, hence the food offered on it 
deserves no respect’. 

Mai 1:13 You say, ‘How tiresome it all is!’. and sniff disdainfully at me, says Yahweh Sabaoth. You bring a 
stolen, lame or diseased animal, you bring that as an offering! Am I to accept this from you? says Yahweh 
Sabaoth. 

Mai 1:14 Cursed be the rogue who has a male in his flock but pays his vow by sacrificing a blemished animal to 
me! For I am a great king, says Yahweh Sabaoth, and among the nations my name inspires awe”. 

Mai 2:1 “And now, priests, this commandment is for you. 

Mai 2:2 If you will not listen, if you will not sincerely resolve to glorify my name, says Yahweh Sabaoth, I shall 
certainly lay a curse on you and I shall curse your blessing. Indeed I will lay a curse, for none of you makes this 
resolve. 

Mai 2:3 Now, I am going to break your arm and throw offal in your faces — the offal of your solemn feasts — and 
sweep you away with it. 

Mai 2:4 Then you will know that I sent this commandment to you, to affirm my intention to maintain my covenant 
with Levi, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 2:5 My covenant was with him — a covenant of life and peace, and these were what I gave him — a 
covenant of respect, and he respected me and held my name in awe. 

Mai 2:6 The law of truth was in his mouth and guilt was not found on his lips; he walked in peace and justice 
with me and he converted many from sinning. 

Mai 2:7 The priest’s lips ought to safeguard knowledge; his mouth is where the law should be sought, since he 
is Yahweh Sabaoth’s messenger. 

Mai 2:8 But you yourselves have turned aside from the way; you have caused many to lapse by your teaching. 
Since you have destroyed the covenant of Levi, says Yahweh Sabaoth, 

Mai 2:9 so I in my turn have made you contemptible and vile to the whole people, for not having kept my ways 
and for being partial in applying the law. 

Mai 2:10 “Is there not one Father of us all? Did not one God create us? Why, then, do we break faith with one 
another, profaning the covenant of our ancestors? 

Mai 2:11 Judah has broken faith; a detestable thing has been done in Israel and in Jerusalem. For Judah has 
profaned Yahweh’s beloved sanctuary; he has married the daughter of an alien god. 

Mai 2:12 May Yahweh deprive such an offender of witness and advocate in the tents of Jacob among those who 
present offerings to Yahweh Sabaoth! 

Mai 2:13 “And here is something else you do: you cover the altar of Yahweh with tears, with weeping and 
wailing, because he now refuses to consider the offering or to accept it from you. 

Mai 2:14 And you ask, ‘Why?’. Because Yahweh stands as witness between you and the wife of your youth, 
with whom you have broken faith, even though she was your partner and your wife by covenant. 



Mai 2:15 Did he not create a single being, having flesh and the breath of life? And what does this single being 
seek? God — given offspring! Have respect for your own life then, and do not break faith with the wife of your 
youth. 

Mai 2:16 For I hate divorce, says Yahweh, God of Israel, and people concealing their cruelty under a cloak, says 
Yahweh Sabaoth. Have respect for your own life then, and do not break faith. 

Mai 2:17 “You have wearied Yahweh with your talk. You ask, ‘How have we wearied him?’. When you say, ‘Any 
evil-doer is good as far as Yahweh is concerned; indeed he is delighted with them’; or when you say, ‘Where is 
the God of fair judgement now?’. 

Mai 3:1 “Look, I shall send my messenger to clear a way before me. And suddenly the Lord whom you seek will 
come to his Temple; yes, the angel of the covenant, for whom you long, is on his way, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 3:2 Who will be able to resist the day of his coming? Who will remain standing when he appears? For he 
will be like a refiner’s fire, like fullers’ alkali. 

Mai 3:3 He will take his seat as refiner and purifier; he will purify the sons of Levi and refine them like gold and 
silver, so that they can make the offering to Yahweh with uprightness. 

Mai 3:4 The offering of Judah and Jerusalem will then be acceptable to Yahweh as in former days, as in the 
years of old. 

Mai 3:5 I am coming to put you on trial and I shall be a ready witness against sorcerers, adulterers, perjurers, 
and against those who oppress the wage-earner, the widow and the orphan, and who rob the foreigner of his 
rights and do not respect me, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 3:6 “No; I, Yahweh, do not change; and you have not ceased to be children of Jacob! 

Mai 3:7 Ever since the days of your ancestors, you have evaded my statutes and not observed them. Return to 
me and 1 will return to you, says Yahweh Sabaoth. You ask, ‘How are we to return? 

Mai 3:8 Can a human being cheat God?’. Yet you try to cheat me! You ask, ‘How do we try to cheat you?’. Over 
tithes and contributions. 

Mai 3:9 A curse lies on you because you, this whole nation, try to cheat me. 

Mai 3:10 Bring the tithes in full to the treasury, so that there is food in my house; put me to the test now like this, 
says Yahweh Sabaoth, and see if I do not open the floodgates of heaven for you and pour out an abundant 
blessing for you. 

Mai 3:11 For your sakes, I shall forbid the locust to destroy the produce of your soil or prevent the vine from 
bearing fruit in your field, says Yahweh Sabaoth, 

Mai 3:12 and all the nations will call you blessed, for you will be a land of delights, says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 3:13 “You have said harsh things about me, says Yahweh. And yet you say, ‘What have we said against 
you?’. 

Mai 3:14 You have said, ‘It is useless to serve God; what is the good of keeping his commands or of walking 
mournfully before Yahweh Sabaoth? 

Mai 3:15 In fact, we now call the proud the happy ones; the evil-doers are the ones who prosper; they put God 
to the test, yet come to no harm!’”. 

Mai 3:16 Then those who feared Yahweh talked to one another about this, and Yahweh took note and listened; 
and a book of remembrance was written in his presence recording those who feared him and kept his name in 
mind. 

Mai 3:17 “On the day when 1 act, says Yahweh Sabaoth, they will be my most prized possession, and 1 shall 
spare them in the way a man spares the son who serves him. 

Mai 3:18 Then once again you will see the difference between the upright person and the wicked one, between 
the one who serves God and the one who does not serve him. 

Mai 3:19 “For look, the Day is coming, glowing like a furnace. All the proud and all the evil-doers will be the 
stubble, and the Day, when it comes, will set them ablaze, says Yahweh Sabaoth, leaving them neither root nor 
branch. 

Mai 3:20 But for you who fear my name, the Sun of justice will rise with healing in his rays, and you will come 
out leaping like calves from the stall, 

Mai 3:21 and trample on the wicked, who will be like ashes under the soles of your feet on the day when I act, 
says Yahweh Sabaoth. 

Mai 3:22 “Remember the Law of my servant Moses to whom at Horeb I prescribed decrees and rulings for all 
Israel. 

Mai 3:23 “Look, I shall send you the prophet Elijah before the great and awesome Day of Yahweh comes. 

Mai 3:24 He will reconcile parents to their children and children to their parents, to forestall my putting the 
country under the curse of destruction”. 



Eph 1:1 Paul, by the will of God an apostle of Christ Jesus, to God’s holy people, faithful in Christ Jesus. 

Eph 1 :2 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Eph 1 :3 Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all the spiritual blessings 
of heaven in Christ. 

Eph 1 :4 Thus he chose us in Christ before the world was made to be holy and faultless before him in love, 

Eph 1 :5 marking us out for himself beforehand, to be adopted sons, through Jesus Christ. Such was his 
purpose and good pleasure, 

Eph 1 :6 to the praise of the glory of his grace, his free gift to us in the Beloved, 

Eph 1 :7 in whom, through his blood, we gain our freedom, the forgiveness of our sins. Such is the richness of 
the grace 

Eph 1:8 which he has showered on us in all wisdom and insight. 

Eph 1 :9 He has let us know the mystery of his purpose, according to his good pleasure which he determined 



beforehand in Christ, 

Eph 1:10 for him to act upon when the times had run their course: that he would bring everything together under 
Christ, as head, everything in the heavens and everything on earth. 

Eph 1:11 And it is in him that we have received our heritage, marked out beforehand as we were, under the plan 
of the One who guides all things as he decides by his own will, 

Eph 1:12 chosen to be, for the praise of his glory, the people who would put their hopes in Christ before he 
came. 

Eph 1:13 Now you too, in him, have heard the message of the truth and the gospel of your salvation, and having 
put your trust in it you have been stamped with the seal of the Holy Spirit of the Promise, 

Eph 1:14 who is the pledge of our inheritance, for the freedom of the people whom God has taken for his own, 
for the praise of his glory. 

Eph 1:15 That is why I, having once heard about your faith in the Lord Jesus, and your love for all God’s holy 
people, 

Eph 1:16 have never failed to thank God for you and to remember you in my prayers. 

Eph 1:17 May the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give you a spirit of wisdom and perception 
of what is revealed, to bring you to full knowledge of him. 

Eph 1:18 May he enlighten the eyes of your mind so that you can see what hope his call holds for you, how rich 
is the glory of the heritage he offers among his holy people, 

Eph 1:19 and how extraordinarily great is the power that he has exercised for us believers; this accords with the 
strength of his power 

Eph 1 :20 at work in Christ, the power which he exercised in raising him from the dead and enthroning him at his 
right hand, in heaven, 

Eph 1 :21 far above every principality, ruling force, power or sovereignty, or any other name that can be named, 
not only in this age but also in the age to come. 

Eph 1 :22 He has put all things under his feet, and made him, as he is above all things, the head of the Church; 
Eph 1 :23 which is his Body, the fullness of him who is filled, all in all. 

Eph 2:1 And you were dead, through the crimes and the sins 

Eph 2:2 which used to make up your way of life when you were living by the principles of this world, obeying the 
ruler who dominates the air, the spirit who is at work in those who rebel. 

Eph 2:3 We too were all among them once, living only by our natural inclinations, obeying the demands of 
human self-indulgence and our own whim; our nature made us no less liable to God’s retribution than the rest of 
the world. 

Eph 2:4 But God, being rich in faithful love, through the great love with which he loved us, 

Eph 2:5 even when we were dead in our sins, brought us to life with Christ — it is through grace that you have 
been saved- 

Eph 2:6 and raised us up with him and gave us a place with him in heaven, in Christ Jesus. 

Eph 2:7 This was to show for all ages to come, through his goodness towards us in Christ Jesus, how 
extraordinarily rich he is in grace. 

Eph 2:8 Because it is by grace that you have been saved, through faith; not by anything of your own, but by a 
gift from God; 

Eph 2:9 not by anything that you have done, so that nobody can claim the credit. 

Eph 2:10 We are God’s work of art, created in Christ Jesus for the good works which God has already 
designated to make up our way of life. 

Eph 2:1 1 Do not forget, then, that there was a time when you who were gentiles by physical descent, termed the 
uncircumcised by those who speak of themselves as the circumcised by reason of a physical operation, 

Eph 2:12 do not forget, I say, that you were at that time separate from Christ and excluded from membership of 
Israel, aliens with no part in the covenants of the Promise, limited to this world, without hope and without God. 
Eph 2:13 But now in Christ Jesus, you that used to be so far off have been brought close, by the blood of Christ. 
Eph 2:14 For he is the peace between us, and has made the two into one entity and broken down the barrier 
which used to keep them apart, by destroying in his own person the hostility, 

Eph 2:15 that is, the Law of commandments with its decrees. His purpose in this was, by restoring peace, to 
create a single New Man out of the two of them, 

Eph 2:16 and through the cross, to reconcile them both to God in one Body; in his own person he killed the 
hostility. 

Eph 2:17 He came to bring the good news of peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near. 
Eph 2:18 Through him, then, we both in the one Spirit have free access to the Father. 

Eph 2:19 So you are no longer aliens or foreign visitors; you are fellow-citizens with the holy people of God and 
part of God’s household. 

Eph 2:20 You are built upon the foundations of the apostles and prophets, and Christ Jesus himself is the 



cornerstone. 

Eph 2:21 Every structure knit together in him grows into a holy temple in the Lord; 

Eph 2:22 and you too, in him, are being built up into a dwelling-place of God in the Spirit. 

Eph 3:1 It is because of this that I, Paul, a prisoner of the Lord Jesus on behalf of you gentiles… 

Eph 3:2 You have surely heard the way in which God entrusted me with the grace he gave me for your sake; 
Eph 3:3 he made known to me by a revelation the mystery I have just described briefly- 
Eph 3:4 a reading of it will enable you to perceive my understanding of the mystery of Christ. 

Eph 3:5 This mystery, as it is now revealed in the Spirit to his holy apostles and prophets, was unknown to 
humanity in previous generations: 

Eph 3:6 that the gentiles now have the same inheritance and form the same Body and enjoy the same promise 
in Christ Jesus through the gospel. 

Eph 3:7 I have been made the servant of that gospel by a gift of grace from God who gave it to me by the 
workings of his power. 

Eph 3:8 I, who am less than the least of all God’s holy people, have been entrusted with this special grace, of 
proclaiming to the gentiles the unfathomable treasure of Christ 

Eph 3:9 and of throwing light on the inner workings of the mystery kept hidden through all the ages in God, the 
Creator of everything. 

Eph 3:10 The purpose of this was, that now, through the Church, the principalities and ruling forces should learn 
how many-sided God’s wisdom is, 

Eph 3:1 1 according to the plan which he had formed from all eternity in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

Eph 3:12 In him we are bold enough to approach God in complete confidence, through our faith in him; 

Eph 3:13 so, I beg you, do not let the hardships I go through on your account make you waver; they are your 
glory. 

Eph 3:14 This, then, is what I pray, kneeling before the Father, 

Eph 3:15 from whom every fatherhood, in heaven or on earth, takes its name. 

Eph 3:16 In the abundance of his glory may he, through his Spirit, enable you to grow firm in power with regard 
to your inner self, 

Eph 3:17 so that Christ may live in your hearts through faith, and then, planted in love and built on love, 

Eph 3:18 with all God’s holy people you will have the strength to grasp the breadth and the length, the height 
and the depth; 

Eph 3:19 so that, knowing the love of Christ, which is beyond knowledge, you may be filled with the utter 
fullness of God. 

Eph 3:20 Glory be to him whose power, working in us, can do infinitely more than we can ask or imagine; 

Eph 3:21 glory be to him from generation to generation in the Church and in Christ Jesus for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

Eph 4:1 I, the prisoner in the Lord, urge you therefore to lead a life worthy of the vocation to which you were 
called. 

Eph 4:2 With all humility and gentleness, and with patience, support each other in love. 

Eph 4:3 Take every care to preserve the unity of the Spirit by the peace that binds you together. 

Eph 4:4 There is one Body, one Spirit, just as one hope is the goal of your calling by God. 

Eph 4:5 There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 

Eph 4:6 and one God and Father of all, over all, through all and within all. 

Eph 4:7 On each one of us God’s favour has been bestowed in whatever way Christ allotted it. 

Eph 4:8 That is why it says: He went up to the heights, took captives, he gave gifts to humanity. 

Eph 4:9 When it says, “he went up”, it must mean that he had gone down to the deepest levels of the earth. 

Eph 4:10 The one who went down is none other than the one who went up above all the heavens to fill all 
things. 

Eph 4:1 1 And to some, his “gift” was that they should be apostles; to some prophets; to some, evangelists; to 
some, pastors and teachers; 

Eph 4:12 to knit God’s holy people together for the work of service to build up the Body of Christ, 

Eph 4:13 until we all reach unity in faith and knowledge of the Son of God and form the perfect Man, fully 
mature with the fullness of Christ himself. 

Eph 4:14 Then we shall no longer be children, or tossed one way and another, and carried hither and thither by 
every new gust of teaching, at the mercy of all the tricks people play and their unscrupulousness in deliberate 
deception. 

Eph 4:15 If we live by the truth and in love, we shall grow completely into Christ, who is the head 

Eph 4:16 by whom the whole Body is fitted and joined together, every joint adding its own strength, for each 

individual part to work according to its function. So the body grows until it has built itself up in love. 

Eph 4:17 So this I say to you and attest to you in the Lord, do not go on living the empty-headed life that the 



gentiles live. 

Eph 4:18 Intellectually they are in the dark, and they are estranged from the life of God, because of the 
ignorance which is the consequence of closed minds. 

Eph 4:19 Their sense of right and wrong once dulled, they have abandoned all self-control and pursue to excess 
every kind of uncleanness. 

Eph 4:20 Now that is hardly the way you have learnt Christ, 

Eph 4:21 unless you failed to hear him properly when you were taught what the truth is in Jesus. 

Eph 4:22 You were to put aside your old self, which belongs to your old way of life and is corrupted by following 
illusory desires. 

Eph 4:23 Your mind was to be renewed in spirit 

Eph 4:24 so that you could put on the New Man that has been created on God’s principles, in the uprightness 
and holiness of the truth. 

Eph 4:25 So from now on, there must be no more lies. Speak the truth to one another, since we are all parts of 
one another. 

Eph 4:26 Even if you are angry, do not sin: never let the sun set on your anger 
Eph 4:27 or else you will give the devil a foothold. 

Eph 4:28 Anyone who was a thief must stop stealing; instead he should exert himself at some honest job with 
his own hands so that he may have something to share with those in need. 

Eph 4:29 No foul word should ever cross your lips; let your words be for the improvement of others, as occasion 
offers, and do good to your listeners; 

Eph 4:30 do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God who has marked you with his seal, ready for the day when we 
shall be set free. 

Eph 4:31 Any bitterness or bad temper or anger or shouting or abuse must be far removed from you — as must 
every kind of malice. 

Eph 4:32 Be generous to one another, sympathetic, forgiving each other as readily as God forgave you in 
Christ. 

Eph 5:1 As God’s dear children, then, take him as your pattern, 

Eph 5:2 and follow Christ by loving as he loved you, giving himself up for us as an offering and a sweet-smelling 
sacrifice to God. 

Eph 5:3 Among you there must be not even a mention of sexual vice or impurity in any of its forms, or greed: 
this would scarcely become the holy people of God! 

Eph 5:4 There must be no foul or salacious talk or coarse jokes — all this is wrong for you; there should rather 
be thanksgiving. 

Eph 5:5 For you can be quite certain that nobody who indulges in sexual immorality or impurity or greed — which 
is worshipping a false god — can inherit the kingdom of God. 

Eph 5:6 Do not let anyone deceive you with empty arguments: it is such behaviour that draws down God’s 
retribution on those who rebel against him. 

Eph 5:7 Make sure that you do not throw in your lot with them. 

Eph 5:8 You were darkness once, but now you are light in the Lord; behave as children of light, 

Eph 5:9 for the effects of the light are seen in complete goodness and uprightness and truth. 

Eph 5:10 Try to discover what the Lord wants of you, 

Eph 5:1 1 take no part in the futile works of darkness but, on the contrary, show them up for what they are. 

Eph 5:12 The things which are done in secret are shameful even to speak of; 

Eph 5:13 but anything shown up by the light will be illuminated 

Eph 5:14 and anything illuminated is itself a light. That is why it is said: Wake up, sleeper, rise from the dead, 
and Christ will shine on you. 

Eph 5:15 So be very careful about the sort of lives you lead, like intelligent and not like senseless people. 

Eph 5:16 Make the best of the present time, for it is a wicked age. 

Eph 5:17 This is why you must not be thoughtless but must recognise what is the will of the Lord. 

Eph 5:18 Do not get drunk with wine; this is simply dissipation; be filled with the Spirit. 

Eph 5:19 Sing psalms and hymns and inspired songs among yourselves, singing and chanting to the Lord in 
your hearts, 

Eph 5:20 always and everywhere giving thanks to God who is our Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Eph 5:21 Be subject to one another out of reverence for Christ. 

Eph 5:22 Wives should be subject to their husbands as to the Lord, 

Eph 5:23 since, as Christ is head of the Church and saves the whole body, so is a husband the head of his wife; 
Eph 5:24 and as the Church is subject to Christ, so should wives be to their husbands, in everything. 

Eph 5:25 Husbands should love their wives, just as Christ loved the Church and sacrificed himself for her 
Eph 5:26 to make her holy by washing her in cleansing water with a form of words, 



Eph 5:27 so that when he took the Church to himself she would be glorious, with no speck or wrinkle or anything 
like that, but holy and faultless. 

Eph 5:28 In the same way, husbands must love their wives as they love their own bodies; for a man to love his 
wife is for him to love himself. 

Eph 5:29 A man never hates his own body, but he feeds it and looks after it; and that is the way Christ treats the 
Church, 

Eph 5:30 because we are parts of his Body. 

Eph 5:31 This is why a man leaves his father and mother and becomes attached to his wife, and the two 
become one flesh. 

Eph 5:32 This mystery has great significance, but I am applying it to Christ and the Church. 

Eph 5:33 To sum up: you also, each one of you, must love his wife as he loves himself; and let every wife 
respect her husband. 

Eph 6:1 Children, be obedient to your parents in the Lord — that is what uprightness demands. 

Eph 6:2 The first commandment that has a promise attached to it is: Honour your father and your mother, 

Eph 6:3 and the promise is: so that you may have long life and prosper in the land. 

Eph 6:4 And parents, never drive your children to resentment but bring them up with correction and advice 
inspired by the Lord. 

Eph 6:5 Slaves, be obedient to those who are, according to human reckoning, your masters, with deep respect 
and sincere loyalty, as you are obedient to Christ: 

Eph 6:6 not only when you are under their eye, as if you had only to please human beings, but as slaves of 
Christ who wholeheartedly do the will of God. 

Eph 6:7 Work willingly for the sake of the Lord and not for the sake of human beings. 

Eph 6:8 Never forget that everyone, whether a slave or a free man, will be rewarded by the Lord for whatever 
work he has done well. 

Eph 6:9 And those of you who are employers, treat your slaves in the same spirit; do without threats, and never 
forget that they and you have the same Master in heaven and there is no favouritism with him. 

Eph 6:10 Finally, grow strong in the Lord, with the strength of his power. 

Eph 6:1 1 Put on the full armour of God so as to be able to resist the devil’s tactics. 

Eph 6:12 For it is not against human enemies that we have to struggle, but against the principalities and the 
ruling forces who are masters of the darkness in this world, the spirits of evil in the heavens. 

Eph 6:13 That is why you must take up all God’s armour, or you will not be able to put up any resistance on the 
evil day, or stand your ground even though you exert yourselves to the full. 

Eph 6:14 So stand your ground, with truth a belt round your waist, and uprightness a breastplate, 

Eph 6:15 wearing for shoes on your feet the eagerness to spread the gospel of peace 

Eph 6:16 and always carrying the shield of faith so that you can use it to quench the burning arrows of the Evil 
One. 

Eph 6:17 And then you must take salvation as your helmet and the sword of the Spirit, that is, the word of God. 
Eph 6:18 In all your prayer and entreaty keep praying in the Spirit on every possible occasion. Never get tired of 
staying awake to pray for all God’s holy people, 

Eph 6:19 and pray for me to be given an opportunity to open my mouth and fearlessly make known the mystery 
of the gospel 

Eph 6:20 of which I am an ambassador in chains; pray that in proclaiming it I may speak as fearlessly as I ought 
to. 

Eph 6:21 So that you know, as well, what is happening to me and what I am doing, my dear friend Tychicus, my 
trustworthy helper in the Lord, will tell you everything. 

Eph 6:22 I am sending him to you precisely for this purpose, to give you news about us and encourage you 
thoroughly. 

Eph 6:23 May God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ grant peace, love and faith to all the brothers. 

Eph 6:24 May grace be with all who love our Lord Jesus Christ, in life imperishable. 

Phi 1:1 Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, to all God’s holy people in Christ Jesus at Philippi, together 
with their presiding elders and the deacons. 

Phi 1:2 Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Phi 1 :3 I thank my God whenever I think of you, 

Phi 1 :4 and every time I pray for you all, I always pray with joy 

Phi 1 :5 for your partnership in the gospel from the very first day up to the present. 

Phi 1:6 lam quite confident that the One who began a good work in you will go on completing it until the Day of 
Jesus Christ comes. 

Phi 1:7 It is only right that I should feel like this towards you all, because you have a place in my heart, since 
you have all shared together in the grace that has been mine, both my chains and my work defending and 



establishing the gospel. 

Phi 1 :8 For God will testify for me how much I long for you all with the warm longing of Christ Jesus; 

Phi 1 :9 it is my prayer that your love for one another may grow more and more with the knowledge and 
complete understanding 

Phi 1:10 that will help you to come to true discernment, so that you will be innocent and free of any trace of guilt 
when the Day of Christ comes, 

Phi 1:11 entirely filled with the fruits of uprightness through Jesus Christ, for the glory and praise of God. 

Phi 1:12 Now I want you to realise, brothers, that the circumstances of my present life are helping rather than 
hindering the advance of the gospel. 

Phi 1:13 My chains in Christ have become well known not only to all the Praetorium, but to everybody else, 

Phi 1:14 and so most of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence from my chains and are getting more 
and more daring in announcing the Message without any fear. 

Phi 1:15 It is true that some of them are preaching Christ out of malice and rivalry; but there are many as well 
whose intentions are good; 

Phi 1:16 some are doing it out of love, knowing that I remain firm in my defence of the gospel. 

Phi 1:17 There are others who are proclaiming Christ out of jealousy, not in sincerity but meaning to add to the 
weight of my chains. 

Phi 1:18 But what does it matter? Only that in both ways, whether with false motives or true, Christ is 
proclaimed, and for that I am happy; 

Phi 1:19 and I shall go on being happy, too, because I know that this is what will save me, with your prayers and 
with the support of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; 

Phi 1:20 all in accordance with my most confident hope and trust that I shall never have to admit defeat, but with 
complete fearlessness I shall go on, so that now, as always, Christ will be glorified in my body, whether by my 
life or my death. 

Phi 1 :21 Life to me, of course, is Christ, but then death would be a positive gain. 

Phi 1 :22 On the other hand again, if to be alive in the body gives me an opportunity for fruitful work, I do not 
know which I should choose. 

Phi 1 :23 I am caught in this dilemma: I want to be gone and to be with Christ, and this is by far the stronger 
desire- 

Phi 1 :24 and yet for your sake to stay alive in this body is a more urgent need. 

Phi 1:25 This much I know for certain, that I shall stay and stand by you all, to encourage your advance and 
your joy in the faith, 

Phi 1 :26 so that my return to be among you may increase to overflowing your pride in Jesus Christ on my 
account. 

Phi 1 :27 But you must always behave in a way that is worthy of the gospel of Christ, so that whether I come to 
you and see for myself or whether I only hear all about you from a distance, I shall find that you are standing firm 
and united in spirit, battling, as a team with a single aim, for the faith of the gospel, 

Phi 1 :28 undismayed by any of your opponents. This will be a clear sign, for them that they are to be lost, and 
for you that you are to be saved. 

Phi 1:29 This comes from God, for you have been granted the privilege for Christ’s sake not only of believing in 
him but of suffering for him as well; 

Phi 1:30 you are fighting the same battle which you saw me fighting for him and which you hear I am fighting 
still. 

Phi 2:1 So if in Christ there is anything that will move you, any incentive in love, any fellowship in the Spirit, any 
warmth or sympathy — 1 appeal to you, 

Phi 2:2 make my joy complete by being of a single mind, one in love, one in heart and one in mind. 

Phi 2:3 Nothing is to be done out of jealousy or vanity; instead, out of humility of mind everyone should give 
preference to others, 

Phi 2:4 everyone pursuing not selfish interests but those of others. 

Phi 2:5 Make your own the mind of Christ Jesus: 

Phi 2:6 Who, being in the form of God, did not count equality with God something to be grasped. 

Phi 2:7 But he emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, becoming as human beings are; and being in every 
way like a human being, 

Phi 2:8 he was humbler yet, even to accepting death, death on a cross. 

Phi 2:9 And for this God raised him high, and gave him the name which is above all other names; 

Phi 2:10 so that all beings in the heavens, on earth and in the underworld, should bend the knee at the name of 
Jesus 

Phi 2:1 1 and that every tongue should acknowledge Jesus Christ as Lord, to the glory of God the Father. 

Phi 2:12 So, my dear friends, you have always been obedient; your obedience must not be limited to times 



when I am present. Now that I am absent it must be more in evidence, so work out your salvation in fear and 
trembling. 

Phi 2:13 It is God who, for his own generous purpose, gives you the intention and the powers to act. 

Phi 2:14 Let your behaviour be free of murmuring and complaining 

Phi 2:15 so that you remain faultless and pure, unspoilt children of God surrounded by a deceitful and 
underhand brood, shining out among them like bright stars in the world, 

Phi 2:16 proffering to it the Word of life. Then I shall have reason to be proud on the Day of Christ, for it will not 
be for nothing that I have run the race and toiled so hard. 

Phi 2:17 Indeed, even if my blood has to be poured as a libation over your sacrifice and the offering of your 

faith, then I shall be glad and join in your rejoicing- 

Phi 2:18 and in the same way, you must be glad and join in my rejoicing. 

Phi 2:19 I hope, in the Lord Jesus, to send Timothy to you soon, so that my mind may be set at rest when I hear 
how you are. 

Phi 2:20 There is nobody else that I can send who is like him and cares as sincerely for your well-being; 

Phi 2:21 they all want to work for themselves, not for Jesus Christ. 

Phi 2:22 But you know what sort of person he has proved himself, working with me for the sake of the gospel 
like a son with his father. 

Phi 2:23 That is the man, then, that I am hoping to send to you immediately I can make out what is going to 
happen to me; 

Phi 2:24 but I am confident in the Lord that I shall come myself, too, before long. 

Phi 2:25 Nevertheless I thought it essential to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother and fellow-worker and 
companion-in-arms since he came as your representative to look after my needs; 

Phi 2:26 because he was missing you all and was worrying because you had heard that he was ill. 

Phi 2:27 Indeed he was seriously ill and nearly died; but God took pity on him — and not only on him but also on 
me, to spare me one grief on top of another. 

Phi 2:28 So I am sending him back as promptly as I can so that you will have the joy of seeing him again, and 
that will be some comfort to me in my distress. 

Phi 2:29 Welcome him in the Lord, then, with all joy; hold people like him in honour, 

Phi 2:30 because it was for Christ’s work that he came so near to dying, risking his life to do the duty to me 
which you could not do yourselves. 

Phi 3:1 Finally, brothers, I wish you joy in the Lord. To write to you what I have already written before is no 
trouble to me and to you will be a protection. 

Phi 3:2 Beware of dogs! Beware of evil workmen! Beware of self-mutilators! 

Phi 3:3 We are the true people of the circumcision since we worship by the Spirit of God and make Christ Jesus 
our only boast, not relying on physical qualifications, 

Phi 3:4 although, I myself could rely on these too. If anyone does claim to rely on them, my claim is better. 

Phi 3:5 Circumcised on the eighth day of my life, I was born of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a 
Hebrew born of Hebrew parents. In the matter of the Law, I was a Pharisee; 

Phi 3:6 as for religious fervour, I was a persecutor of the Church; as for the uprightness embodied in the Law, I 
was faultless. 

Phi 3:7 But what were once my assets I now through Christ Jesus count as losses. 

Phi 3:8 Yes, I will go further: because of the supreme advantage of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, I count 
everything else as loss. For him I have accepted the loss of all other things, and look on them all as filth if only I 
can gain Christ 

Phi 3:9 and be given a place in him, with the uprightness I have gained not from the Law, but through faith in 
Christ, an uprightness from God, based on faith, 

Phi 3:10 that I may come to know him and the power of his resurrection, and partake of his sufferings by being 
moulded to the pattern of his death, 

Phi 3:1 1 striving towards the goal of resurrection from the dead. 

Phi 3:12 Not that I have secured it already, nor yet reached my goal, but I am still pursuing it in the attempt to 
take hold of the prize for which Christ Jesus took hold of me. 

Phi 3:13 Brothers, I do not reckon myself as having taken hold of it; I can only say that forgetting all that lies 
behind me, and straining forward to what lies in front, 

Phi 3:14 I am racing towards the finishing-point to win the prize of God’s heavenly call in Christ Jesus. 

Phi 3:15 So this is the way in which all of us who are mature should be thinking, and if you are still thinking 
differently in any way, then God has yet to make this matter clear to you. 

Phi 3:16 Meanwhile, let us go forward from the point we have each attained. 

Phi 3:17 Brothers, be united in imitating me. Keep your eyes fixed on those who act according to the example 
you have from me. 



Phi 3:18 For there are so many people of whom I have often warned you, and now I warn you again with tears 
in my eyes, who behave like the enemies of Christ’s cross. 

Phi 3:19 They are destined to be lost; their god is the stomach; they glory in what they should think shameful, 
since their minds are set on earthly things. 

Phi 3:20 But our homeland is in heaven and it is from there that we are expecting a Saviour, the Lord Jesus 
Christ, 

Phi 3:21 who will transfigure the wretched body of ours into the mould of his glorious body, through the working 
of the power which he has, even to bring all things under his mastery. 

Phi 4:1 So then, my brothers and dear friends whom I miss so much, my joy and my crown, hold firm in the 
Lord, dear friends. 

Phi 4:2 I urge Euodia, and I urge Syntyche to come to agreement with each other in the Lord; 

Phi 4:3 and I ask you, Syzygus, really to be a “partner” and help them. These women have struggled hard for the 
gospel with me, along with Clement and all my other fellow-workers, whose names are written in the book of life. 
Phi 4:4 Always be joyful, then, in the Lord; I repeat, be joyful. 

Phi 4:5 Let your good sense be obvious to everybody. The Lord is near. 

Phi 4:6 Never worry about anything; but tell God all your desires of every kind in prayer and petition shot 
through with gratitude, 

Phi 4:7 and the peace of God which is beyond our understanding will guard your hearts and your thoughts in 
Christ Jesus. 

Phi 4:8 Finally, brothers, let your minds be filled with everything that is true, everything that is honourable, 
everything that is upright and pure, everything that we love and admire — with whatever is good and 
praiseworthy. 

Phi 4:9 Keep doing everything you learnt from me and were told by me and have heard or seen me doing. Then 
the God of peace will be with you. 

Phi 4:10 As for me, I am full of joy in the Lord, now that at last your consideration for me has blossomed again; 
though I recognise that you really did have consideration before, but had no opportunity to show it. 

Phi 4:1 1 I do not say this because I have lacked anything; I have learnt to manage with whatever I have. 

Phi 4:12 I know how to live modestly, and I know how to live luxuriously too: in every way now I have mastered 
the secret of all conditions: full stomach and empty stomach, plenty and poverty. 

Phi 4:13 There is nothing I cannot do in the One who strengthens me. 

Phi 4:14 All the same, it was good of you to share with me in my hardships. 

Phi 4:15 In the early days of the gospel, as you of Philippi well know, when I left Macedonia, no church other 
than yourselves made common account with me in the matter of expenditure and receipts. You were the only 
ones; 

Phi 4:16 and what is more, you have twice sent me what I needed in Thessalonica. 

Phi 4:17 It is not the gift that I value most; what I value is the interest that is mounting up in your account. 

Phi 4:18 I have all that I need and more: I am fully provided, now that I have received from Epaphroditus the 
offering that you sent, a pleasing smell, the sacrifice which is acceptable and pleasing to God. 

Phi 4:19 And my God will fulfil all your needs out of the riches of his glory in Christ Jesus. 

Phi 4:20 And so glory be to God our Father, for ever and ever. Amen. 

Phi 4:21 My greetings to every one of God’s holy people in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send 
you their greetings. 

Phi 4:22 All God’s holy people send you their greetings, especially those of Caesar’s household. 

Phi 4:23 May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. 

Col 1:1 From Paul, by the will of God an apostle of Christ Jesus, and from our brother Timothy 

Col 1:2 to God’s holy people in Colossae, our faithful brothers in Christ. Grace and peace to you from God our 

Father. 

Col 1 :3 We give thanks for you to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, continually in our prayers, 

Col 1 :4 ever since we heard about your faith in Christ Jesus and the love that you show towards all God’s holy 
people 

Col 1 :5 because of the hope which is stored up for you in heaven. News of this hope reached you not long ago 
through the word of truth, the gospel 

Col 1 :6 that came to you in the same way as it is bearing fruit and growing throughout the world. It has had the 
same effect among you, ever since you heard about the grace of God and recognised it for what it truly is. 

Col 1 :7 This you learnt from Epaphras, our very dear fellow-worker and a trustworthy deputy for us as Christ’s 
servant, 

Col 1 :8 and it was he who also told us all about your love in the Spirit. 

Col 1 :9 That is why, ever since the day he told us, we have never failed to remember you in our prayers and ask 
that through perfect wisdom and spiritual understanding you should reach the fullest knowledge of his will 



Col 1:10 and so be able to lead a life worthy of the Lord, a life acceptable to him in all its aspects, bearing fruit in 
every kind of good work and growing in knowledge of God, 

Col 1:1 1 fortified, in accordance with his glorious strength, with all power always to persevere and endure, 

Col 1:12 giving thanks with joy to the Father who has made you able to share the lot of God’s holy people and 
with them to inherit the light. 

Col 1:13 Because that is what he has done. It is he who has rescued us from the ruling force of darkness and 
transferred us to the kingdom of the Son that he loves, 

Col 1:14 and in him we enjoy our freedom, the forgiveness of sin. 

Col 1:15 He is the image of the unseen God, the first-born of all creation, 

Col 1:16 for in him were created all things in heaven and on earth: everything visible and everything invisible, 
thrones, ruling forces, sovereignties, powers — all things were created through him and for him. 

Col 1:17 He exists before all things and in him all things hold together, 

Col 1:18 and he is the Head of the Body, that is, the Church. He is the Beginning, the first-born from the dead, 
so that he should be supreme in every way; 

Col 1:19 because God wanted all fullness to be found in him 

Col 1:20 and through him to reconcile all things to him, everything in heaven and everything on earth, by making 
peace through his death on the cross. 

Col 1 :21 You were once estranged and of hostile intent through your evil behaviour; 

Col 1 :22 now he has reconciled you, by his death and in that mortal body, to bring you before himself holy, 
faultless and irreproachable- 

Col 1 :23 as long as you persevere and stand firm on the solid base of the faith, never letting yourselves drift 
away from the hope promised by the gospel, which you have heard, which has been preached to every creature 
under heaven, and of which I, Paul, have become the servant. 

Col 1 :24 It makes me happy to be suffering for you now, and in my own body to make up all the hardships that 
still have to be undergone by Christ for the sake of his body, the Church, 

Col 1 :25 of which I was made a servant with the responsibility towards you that God gave to me, that of 
completing God’s message, 

Col 1 :26 the message which was a mystery hidden for generations and centuries and has now been revealed to 
his holy people. 

Col 1 :27 It was God’s purpose to reveal to them how rich is the glory of this mystery among the gentiles; it is 
Christ among you, your hope of glory: 

Col 1 :28 this is the Christ we are proclaiming, admonishing and instructing everyone in all wisdom, to make 
everyone perfect in Christ. 

Col 1 :29 And it is for this reason that I labour, striving with his energy which works in me mightily. 

Col 2:1 I want you to know, then, what a struggle I am having on your behalf and on behalf of those in Laodicea, 
and on behalf of so many others who have never seen me face to face. 

Col 2:2 It is all to bind them together in love and to encourage their resolution until they are rich in the assurance 
of their complete understanding and have knowledge of the mystery of God 
Col 2:3 in which all the jewels of wisdom and knowledge are hidden. 

Col 2:4 I say this to make sure that no one deceives you with specious arguments. 

Col 2:5 I may be absent in body, but in spirit I am there among you, delighted to find how well-ordered you are 
and to see how firm your faith in Christ is. 

Col 2:6 So then, as you received Jesus as Lord and Christ, now live your lives in him, 

Col 2:7 be rooted in him and built up on him, held firm by the faith you have been taught, and overflowing with 
thanksgiving. 

Col 2:8 Make sure that no one captivates you with the empty lure of a “philosophy” of the kind that human beings 
hand on, based on the principles of this world and not on Christ. 

Col 2:9 In him, in bodily form, lives divinity in all its fullness, 

Col 2:10 and in him you too find your own fulfilment, in the one who is the head of every sovereignty and ruling 
force. 

Col 2:1 1 In him you have been circumcised, with a circumcision performed, not by human hand, but by the 
complete stripping of your natural self. This is circumcision according to Christ. 

Col 2:12 You have been buried with him by your baptism; by which, too, you have been raised up with him 
through your belief in the power of God who raised him from the dead. 

Col 2:13 You were dead, because you were sinners and uncircumcised in body: he has brought you to life with 
him, he has forgiven us every one of our sins. 

Col 2:14 He has wiped out the record of our debt to the Law, which stood against us; he has destroyed it by 
nailing it to the cross; 

Col 2:15 and he has stripped the sovereignties and the ruling forces, and paraded them in public, behind him in 



his triumphal procession. 

Col 2:16 Then never let anyone criticise you for what you eat or drink, or about observance of annual festivals, 
New Moons or Sabbaths. 

Col 2:17 These are only a shadow of what was coming: the reality is the body of Christ. 

Col 2:18 Do not be cheated of your prize by anyone who chooses to grovel to angels and worship them, pinning 
every hope on visions received, vainly puffed up by a human way of thinking; 

Col 2:19 such a person has no connection to the Head, by which the whole body, given all that it needs and 
held together by its joints and sinews, grows with the growth given by God. 

Col 2:20 If you have really died with Christ to the principles of this world, why do you still let rules dictate to you, 
as though you were still living in the world? 

Col 2:21 -'Do not pick up this, do not eat that, do not touch the other”, 

Col 2:22 and all about things which perish even while they are being used — according to merely human 
commandments and doctrines! 

Col 2:23 In these rules you can indeed find what seems to be good sense — the cultivation of the will, and a 
humility which takes no account of the body; but in fact they have no value against self-indulgence. 

Col 3:1 Since you have been raised up to be with Christ, you must look for the things that are above, where 
Christ is, sitting at God’s right hand. 

Col 3:2 Let your thoughts be on things above, not on the things that are on the earth, 

Col 3:3 because you have died, and now the life you have is hidden with Christ in God. 

Col 3:4 But when Christ is revealed — and he is your life-you, too, will be revealed with him in glory. 

Col 3:5 That is why you must kill everything in you that is earthly: sexual vice, impurity, uncontrolled passion, 
evil desires and especially greed, which is the same thing as worshipping a false god; 

Col 3:6 it is precisely these things which draw God’s retribution upon those who resist. 

Col 3:7 And these things made up your way of life when you were living among such people, 

Col 3:8 but now you also must give up all these things: human anger, hot temper, malice, abusive language and 
dirty talk; 

Col 3:9 and do not lie to each other. You have stripped off your old behaviour with your old self, 

Col 3:10 and you have put on a new self which will progress towards true knowledge the more it is renewed in 
the image of its Creator; 

Col 3:1 1 and in that image there is no room for distinction between Greek and Jew, between the circumcised 
and uncircumcised, or between barbarian and Scythian, slave and free. There is only Christ: he is everything 
and he is in everything. 

Col 3:12 As the chosen of God, then, the holy people whom he loves, you are to be clothed in heartfelt 
compassion, in generosity and humility, gentleness and patience. 

Col 3:13 Bear with one another; forgive each other if one of you has a complaint against another. The Lord has 
forgiven you; now you must do the same. 

Col 3:14 Over all these clothes, put on love, the perfect bond. 

Col 3:15 And may the peace of Christ reign in your hearts, because it is for this that you were called together in 
one body. Always be thankful. 

Col 3:16 Let the Word of Christ, in all its richness, find a home with you. Teach each other, and advise each 
other, in all wisdom. With gratitude in your hearts sing psalms and hymns and inspired songs to God; 

Col 3:17 and whatever you say or do, let it be in the name of the Lord Jesus, in thanksgiving to God the Father 
through him. 

Col 3:18 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as you should in the Lord. 

Col 3:19 Husbands, love your wives and do not be sharp with them. 

Col 3:20 Children, be obedient to your parents always, because that is what will please the Lord. 

Col 3:21 Parents, do not irritate your children or they will lose heart. 

Col 3:22 Slaves, be obedient in every way to the people who, according to human reckoning, are your masters; 
not only when you are under their eye, as if you had only to please human beings, but wholeheartedly, out of 
respect for the Master. 

Col 3:23 Whatever your work is, put your heart into it as done for the Lord and not for human beings, 

Col 3:24 knowing that the Lord will repay you by making you his heirs. It is Christ the Lord that you are serving. 
Col 3:25 Anyone who does wrong will be repaid in kind. For there is no favouritism. 

Col 4:1 Masters, make sure that your slaves are given what is upright and fair, knowing that you too have a 
Master in heaven. 

Col 4:2 Be persevering in your prayers and be thankful as you stay awake to pray. 

Col 4:3 Pray for us especially, asking God to throw open a door for us to announce the message and proclaim 
the mystery of Christ, for the sake of which I am in chains; 

Col 4:4 pray that I may proclaim it as clearly as I ought. 



Col 4:5 Act wisely with outsiders, making the best of the present time. 

Col 4:6 Always talk pleasantly and with a flavour of wit but be sensitive to the kind of answer each one requires. 
Col 4:7 Tychicus will tell you all the news about me. He is a very dear brother, and a trustworthy helper and 
companion in the service of the Lord. 

Col 4:8 I am sending him to you precisely for this purpose: to give you news about us and to encourage you 
thoroughly. 

Col 4:9 With him I am sending Onesimus, that dear and trustworthy brother who is a fellow-citizen of yours. 
They will tell you everything that is happening here. 

Col 4:10 Aristarchus, who is here in prison with me, sends his greetings, and so does Mark, the cousin of 
Barnabas — you were sent some instructions about him; if he comes to you, give him a warm welcome- 
Col 4:1 1 and Jesus Justus adds his greetings. Of all those who have come over from the circumcision, these 
are the only ones actually working with me for the kingdom of God. They have been a great comfort to me. 

Col 4:12 Epaphras, your fellow-citizen, sends his greetings; this servant of Christ Jesus never stops battling for 
you, praying that you will never lapse but always hold perfectly and securely to the will of God. 

Col 4:13 I can testify for him that he works hard for you, as well as for those at Laodicea and Hierapolis. 

Col 4:14 Greetings from my dear friend Luke, the doctor, and also from Demas. 

Col 4:15 Please give my greetings to the brothers at Laodicea and to Nympha and the church which meets in 
her house. 

Col 4:16 After this letter has been read among you, send it on to be read in the church of the Laodiceans; and 
get the letter from Laodicea for you to read yourselves. 

Col 4:17 Give Archippus this message, “Remember the service that the Lord assigned to you, and try to carry it 
out”. 

Col 4:18 This greeting is in my own hand-PAUL. Remember the chains I wear. Grace be with you. 



1 Ti 1:1 Paul, apostle of Christ Jesus appointed by the command of God our Saviour and of Christ Jesus our 
hope, 

1 Ti 1:2 to Timothy, true child of mine in the faith. Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and from Christ 
Jesus our Lord. 

1 Ti 1:3 When I was setting out for Macedonia I urged you to stay on in Ephesus to instruct certain people not to 
spread wrong teaching 

1 Ti 1:4 or to give attention to myths and unending genealogies; these things only foster doubts instead of 
furthering God’s plan which is founded on faith. 

1 Ti 1:5 The final goal at which this instruction aims is love, issuing from a pure heart, a clear conscience and a 
sincere faith. 

1 Ti 1:6 Some people have missed the way to these things and turned to empty speculation, 

1 Ti 1:7 trying to be teachers of the Law; but they understand neither the words they use nor the matters about 
which they make such strong assertions. 

1 Ti 1:8 We are well aware that the Law is good, but only provided it is used legitimately, 

1 Ti 1:9 on the understanding that laws are not framed for people who are upright. On the contrary, they are for 
criminals and the insubordinate, for the irreligious and the wicked, for the sacrilegious and the godless; they are 
for people who kill their fathers or mothers and for murderers, 

1 Ti 1:10 for the promiscuous, homosexuals, kidnappers, for liars and for perjurers — and for everything else that 
is contrary to the sound teaching 

1 Ti 1:11 that accords with the gospel of the glory of the blessed God, the gospel that was entrusted to me. 

1 Ti 1:12 I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has given me strength. By calling me into his service he has judged 
me trustworthy, 

1 Ti 1:13 even though I used to be a blasphemer and a persecutor and contemptuous. Mercy, however, was 
shown me, because while I lacked faith I acted in ignorance; 

1 Ti 1:14 but the grace of our Lord filled me with faith and with the love that is in Christ Jesus. 

1 Ti 1:15 Here is a saying that you can rely on and nobody should doubt: that Christ Jesus came into the world 
to save sinners. I myself am the greatest of them; 

1 Ti 1:16 and if mercy has been shown to me, it is because Jesus Christ meant to make me the leading example 
of his inexhaustible patience for all the other people who were later to trust in him for eternal life. 

1 Ti 1:17 To the eternal King, the undying, invisible and only God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

1 Ti 1:18 Timothy, my son, these are the instructions that I am giving you, in accordance with the words once 
spoken over you by the prophets, so that in their light you may fight like a good soldier 
1 Ti 1:19 with faith and a good conscience for your weapons. Some people have put conscience aside and 
wrecked their faith in consequence. 

1 Ti 1 :20 I mean men like Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan so that they may learn 
not to be blasphemous. 

1 Ti 2:1 I urge then, first of all that petitions, prayers, intercessions and thanksgiving should be offered for 
everyone, 

1 Ti 2:2 for kings and others in authority, so that we may be able to live peaceful and quiet lives with all devotion 
and propriety. 

1 Ti 2:3 To do this is right, and acceptable to God our Saviour: 

1 Ti 2:4 he wants everyone to be saved and reach full knowledge of the truth. 

1 Ti 2:5 For there is only one God, and there is only one mediator between God and humanity, himself a human 
being, Christ Jesus, 

1 Ti 2:6 who offered himself as a ransom for all. This was the witness given at the appointed time, 

1 Ti 2:7 of which I was appointed herald and apostle and — I am telling the truth and no lie — a teacher of the 
gentiles in faith and truth. 

1 Ti 2:8 In every place, then, I want the men to lift their hands up reverently in prayer, with no anger or argument. 
1 Ti 2:9 Similarly, women are to wear suitable clothes and to be dressed quietly and modestly, without braided 
hair or gold and jewellery or expensive clothes; 

1 Ti 2:10 their adornment is to do the good works that are proper for women who claim to be religious. 

1 Ti 2:1 1 During instruction, a woman should be quiet and respectful. 

1 Ti 2:12 I give no permission for a woman to teach or to have authority over a man. A woman ought to be quiet, 

1 Ti 2:13 because Adam was formed first and Eve afterwards, 

1 Ti 2:14 and it was not Adam who was led astray but the woman who was led astray and fell into sin. 

1 Ti 2:15 Nevertheless, she will be saved by child-bearing, provided she lives a sensible life and is constant in 



faith and love and holiness. 

1 Ti 3:1 Here is a saying that you can rely on: to want to be a presiding elder is to desire a noble task. 

1 Ti 3:2 That is why the presiding elder must have an impeccable character. Husband of one wife, he must be 
temperate, discreet and courteous, hospitable and a good teacher; 

1 Ti 3:3 not a heavy drinker, nor hot-tempered, but gentle and peaceable, not avaricious, 

1 Ti 3:4 a man who manages his own household well and brings his children up to obey him and be well- 
behaved: 

1 Ti 3:5 how can any man who does not understand how to manage his own household take care of the Church 
of God? 

1 Ti 3:6 He should not be a new convert, in case pride should turn his head and he incur the same 
condemnation as the devil. 

1 Ti 3:7 It is also necessary that he be held in good repute by outsiders, so that he never falls into disrepute and 
into the devil’s trap. 

1 Ti 3:8 Similarly, deacons must be respectable, not double-tongued, moderate in the amount of wine they drink 
and with no squalid greed for money. 

1 Ti 3:9 They must hold to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience. 

1 Ti 3:10 They are first to be examined, and admitted to serve as deacons only if there is nothing against them. 

1 Ti 3:1 1 Similarly, women must be respectable, not gossips, but sober and wholly reliable. 

1 Ti 3:12 Deacons must be husbands of one wife and must be people who manage their children and 
households well. 

1 Ti 3:13 Those of them who carry out their duties well as deacons will earn a high standing for themselves and 
an authoritative voice in matters concerning faith in Christ Jesus. 

1 Ti 3:14 I write this to you in the hope that I may be able to come to you soon; 

1 Ti 3:15 but in case I should be delayed, I want you to know how people ought to behave in God’s household — 
that is, in the Church of the living God, pillar and support of the truth. 

1 Ti 3:16 Without any doubt, the mystery of our religion is very deep indeed: He was made visible in the flesh, 
justified in the Spirit, seen by angels, proclaimed to the gentiles, believed in throughout the world, taken up in 
glory. 

1 Ti 4:1 The Spirit has explicitly said that during the last times some will desert the faith and pay attention to 
deceitful spirits and doctrines that come from devils, 

1 Ti 4:2 seduced by the hypocrisy of liars whose consciences are branded as though with a red-hot iron: 

1 Ti 4:3 they forbid marriage and prohibit foods which God created to be accepted with thanksgiving by all who 
believe and who know the truth. 

1 Ti 4:4 Everything God has created is good, and no food is to be rejected, provided it is received with 
thanksgiving: 

1 Ti 4:5 the word of God and prayer make it holy. 

1 Ti 4:6 If you put all this to the brothers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus and show that you have 
really digested the teaching of the faith and the good doctrine which you have always followed. 

1 Ti 4:7 Have nothing to do with godless myths and old wives’ tales. Train yourself for religion. 

1 Ti 4:8 Physical exercise is useful enough, but the usefulness of religion is unlimited, since it holds out promise 
both for life here and now and for the life to come; 

1 Ti 4:9 that is a saying that you can rely on and nobody should doubt it. 

1 Ti 4:10 I mean that the point of all our toiling and battling is that we have put our trust in the living God and he 
is the Saviour of the whole human race but particularly of all believers. 

1 Ti 4:1 1 This is what you are to instruct and teach. 

1 Ti 4:12 Let no one disregard you because you are young, but be an example to all the believers in the way you 
speak and behave, and in your love, your faith and your purity. 

1 Ti 4:13 Until I arrive, devote yourself to reading to the people, encouraging and teaching. 

1 Ti 4:14 You have in you a spiritual gift which was given to you when the prophets spoke and the body of elders 
laid their hands on you; do not neglect it. 

1 Ti 4:15 Let this be your care and your occupation, and everyone will be able to see your progress. 

1 Ti 4:16 Be conscientious about what you do and what you teach; persevere in this, and in this way you will 
save both yourself and those who listen to you. 

1 Ti 5:1 Never speak sharply to a man older than yourself, but appeal to him as you would to your own father; 
treat younger men as brothers, 

1 Ti 5:2 older women as mothers and young women as sisters with all propriety. 

1 Ti 5:3 Be considerate to widows — if they really are widowed. 

1 Ti 5:4 If a widow has children or grandchildren, they are to learn first of all to do their duty to their own families 
and repay their debt to their parents, because this is what pleases God. 



1 Ti 5:5 But a woman who is really widowed and left on her own has set her hope on God and perseveres night 
and day in petitions and prayer. 

1 Ti 5:6 The one who thinks only of pleasure is already dead while she is still alive: 

1 Ti 5:7 instruct them in this, too, so that their lives may be blameless. 

1 Ti 5:8 Anyone who does not look after his own relations, especially if they are living with him, has rejected the 
faith and is worse than an unbeliever. 

1 Ti 5:9 Enrolment as a widow is permissible only for a woman at least sixty years old who has had only one 
husband. 

1 Ti 5:10 She must be a woman known for her good works — whether she has brought up her children, been 
hospitable to strangers and washed the feet of God’s holy people, helped people in hardship or been active in all 
kinds of good work. 

1 Ti 5:1 1 Do not accept young widows because if their natural desires distract them from Christ, they want to 
marry again, 

1 Ti 5:12 and then people condemn them for being unfaithful to their original promise. 

1 Ti 5:13 Besides, they learn how to be idle and go round from house to house; and then, not merely idle, they 
learn to be gossips and meddlers in other people’s affairs and to say what should remain unsaid. 

1 Ti 5:14 I think it is best for young widows to marry again and have children and a household to look after, and 
not give the enemy any chance to raise a scandal about them; 

1 Ti 5:15 there are already some who have turned aside to follow Satan. 

1 Ti 5:16 If a woman believer has widowed relatives, she should support them and not make the Church bear the 
expense but enable it to support those who are really widowed. 

1 Ti 5:17 Elders who do their work well while they are in charge earn double reward, especially those who work 
hard at preaching and teaching. 

1 Ti 5:18 As scripture says: You must not muzzle an ox when it is treading out the corn; and again: The worker 
deserves his wages. 

1 Ti 5:19 Never accept any accusation brought against an elder unless it is supported by two or three witnesses. 

1 Ti 5:20 If anyone is at fault, reprimand him publicly, as a warning to the rest. 

1 Ti 5:21 Before God, and before Jesus Christ and the angels he has chosen, I charge you to keep these rules 
impartially and never to be influenced by favouritism. 

1 Ti 5:22 Do not be too quick to lay hands on anyone, and never make yourself an accomplice in anybody else’s 
sin; keep yourself pure. 

1 Ti 5:23 You should give up drinking only water and have a little wine for the sake of your digestion and the 
frequent bouts of illness that you have. 

1 Ti 5:24 The faults of some people are obvious long before they come to the reckoning, while others have faults 
that are not discovered until later. 

1 Ti 5:25 Similarly, the good that people do can be obvious; but even when it is not, it cannot remain hidden. 

1 Ti 6:1 All those under the yoke of slavery must have unqualified respect for their masters, so that the name of 
God and our teaching are not brought into disrepute. 

1 Ti 6:2 Those whose masters are believers are not to respect them less because they are brothers; on the 
contrary, they should serve them all the better, since those who have the benefit of their services are believers 
and dear to God. This is what you are to teach and urge. 

1 Ti 6:3 Anyone who teaches anything different and does not keep to the sound teaching which is that of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the doctrine which is in accordance with true religion, 

1 Ti 6:4 is proud and has no understanding, but rather a weakness for questioning everything and arguing about 
words. All that can come of this is jealousy, contention, abuse and evil mistrust; 

1 Ti 6:5 and unending disputes by people who are depraved in mind and deprived of truth, and imagine that 
religion is a way of making a profit. 

1 Ti 6:6 Religion, of course, does bring large profits, but only to those who are content with what they have. 

1 Ti 6:7 We brought nothing into the world, and we can take nothing out of it; 

1 Ti 6:8 but as long as we have food and clothing, we shall be content with that. 

1 Ti 6:9 People who long to be rich are a prey to trial; they get trapped into all sorts of foolish and harmful 
ambitions which plunge people into ruin and destruction. 

1 Ti 6:10 “The love of money is the root of all evils’ and there are some who, pursuing it, have wandered away 
from the faith and so given their souls any number of fatal wounds. 

1 Ti 6:1 1 But, as someöne dedicated to God, avoid all that. You must aim to be upright and religious, filled with 
faith and love, perseverance and gentleness. 

1 Ti 6:12 Fight the good fight of faith and win the eternal life to which you were called and for which you made 
your noble profession of faith before many witnesses. 

1 Ti 6:13 Now, before God, the source of all life, and before Jesus Christ, who witnessed to his noble profession 



of faith before Pontius Pilate, I charge you 

1 Ti 6:14 to do all that you have been told, with no faults or failures, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 

1 Ti 6:15 who at the due time will be revealed by God, the blessed and only Ruler of all, the King of kings and 
the Lord of lords, 

1 Ti 6:16 who alone is immortal, whose home is in inaccessible light, whom no human being has seen or is able 
to see: to him be honour and everlasting power. Amen. 

1 Ti 6:17 Instruct those who are rich in this world’s goods that they should not be proud and should set their 
hopes not on money, which is untrustworthy, but on God who gives us richly all that we need for our happiness. 

1 Ti 6:18 They are to do good and be rich in good works, generous in giving and always ready to share- 
1 Ti 6:19 this is the way they can amass a good capital sum for the future if they want to possess the only life 
that is real. 

1 Ti 6:20 My dear Timothy, take great care of all that has been entrusted to you. Turn away from godless 
philosophical discussions and the contradictions of the “knowledge” which is not knowledge at all; 

1 Ti 6:21 by adopting this, some have missed the goal of faith. Grace be with you. 

2Ti 1:1 From Paul, apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God in accordance with his promise of life in Christ 
Jesus, 

2Ti 1 :2 to Timothy, dear son of mine. Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and from Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 

2Ti 1 :3 Night and day I thank God whom I serve with a pure conscience as my ancestors did. I remember you in 
my prayers constantly night and day; 

2Ti 1 :4 I remember your tears and long to see you again to complete my joy. 

2Ti 1 :5 I also remember your sincere faith, a faith which first dwelt in your grandmother Lois, and your mother 
Eunice, and I am sure dwells also in you. 

2Ti 1 :6 That is why I am reminding you now to fan into a flame the gift of God that you possess through the 
laying on of my hands. 

2Ti 1 :7 God did not give us a spirit of timidity, but the Spirit of power and love and self-control. 

2Ti 1 :8 So you are never to be ashamed of witnessing to our Lord, or ashamed of me for being his prisoner; but 
share in my hardships for the sake of the gospel, relying on the power of God 

2Ti 1 :9 who has saved us and called us to be holy — not because of anything we ourselves had done but for his 
own purpose and by his own grace. This grace had already been granted to us, in Christ Jesus, before the 
beginning of time, 

2Ti 1:10 but it has been revealed only by the appearing of our Saviour Christ Jesus. He has abolished death, 
and he has brought to light immortality and life through the gospel, 

2Ti 1:11 in whose service I have been made herald, apostle and teacher. 

2Ti 1:12 That is why I am experiencing my present sufferings; but I am not ashamed, because I know in whom I 
have put my trust, and I have no doubt at all that he is able to safeguard until that Day what I have entrusted to 
him. 

2Ti 1:13 Keep as your pattern the sound teaching you have heard from me, in the faith and love that are in 
Christ Jesus. 

2Ti 1:14 With the help of the Holy Spirit who dwells in us, look after that precious thing given in trust. 

2Ti 1:15 As you know, Phygelus and Hermogenes and all the others in Asia have deserted me. 

2Ti 1:16 I hope the Lord will be kind to all the family of Onesiphorus, because he has often been a comfort to 
me and has never been ashamed of my chains. 

2Ti 1:17 On the contrary, as soon as he reached Rome, he searched hard for me and found me. 

2Ti 1:18 May the Lord grant him to find the Lord’s mercy on that Day. You know better than anyone else how 
much he helped me at Ephesus. 

2Ti 2:1 As for you, my dear son, take strength from the grace which is in Christ Jesus. 

2Ti 2:2 Pass on to reliable people what you have heard from me through many witnesses so that they in turn will 
be able to teach others. 

2Ti 2:3 Bear with your share of difficulties, like a good soldier of Christ Jesus. 

2Ti 2:4 No one on active service involves himself in the affairs of civilian life, because he must win the approval 
of the man who enlisted him; 

2Ti 2:5 or again someöne who enters an athletic contest wins only by competing in the sports — a prize can be 
won only by competing according to the rules; 

2Ti 2:6 and again, it is the farmer who works hard that has the first claim on any crop that is harvested. 

2Ti 2:7 Think over what I have said, and the Lord will give you full understanding. 

2Ti 2:8 Remember the gospel that I carry, “Jesus Christ risen from the dead, sprung from the race of David”; 

2Ti 2:9 it is on account of this that I have to put up with suffering, even to being chained like a criminal. But 
God’s message cannot be chained up. 



2Ti 2:10 So I persevere for the sake of those who are chosen, so that they, too, may obtain the salvation that is 
in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. 

2Ti 2:11 Here is a saying that you can rely on: If we have died with him, then we shall live with him. 

2Ti 2:12 If we persevere, then we shall reign with him. If we disown him, then he will disown us. 

2Ti 2:13 If we are faithless, he is faithful still, for he cannot disown his own self. 

2Ti 2:14 Remind them of this; and tell them in the name of God that there must be no wrangling about words: all 
that this ever achieves is the destruction of those who are listening. 

2Ti 2:15 Make every effort to present yourself before God as a proven worker who has no need to be ashamed, 
but who keeps the message of truth on a straight path. 

2Ti 2:16 Have nothing to do with godless philosophical discussions — they only lead further and further away 
from true religion. 

2Ti 2:17 Talk of this kind spreads corruption like gangrene, as in the case of Hymenaeus and Philetus, 

2Ti 2:18 the men who have gone astray from the truth, claiming that the resurrection has already taken place. 
They are upsetting some people’s faith. 

2Ti 2:19 However, God’s solid foundation-stone stands firm, and this is the seal on it: “The Lord knows those 
who are his own” and “All who call on the name of the Lord must avoid evil”. 

2Ti 2:20 Not all the dishes in a large house are made of gold and silver; some are made of wood or 
earthenware: the former are held in honour, the latter held cheap. 

2Ti 2:21 If someöne holds himself aloof from these faults I speak of, he will be a vessel held in honour, 
dedicated and fit for the Master, ready for any good work. 

2Ti 2:22 Turn away from the passions of youth, concentrate on uprightness, faith, love and peace, in union with 
all those who call on the Lord with a pure heart. 

2Ti 2:23 Avoid these foolish and undisciplined speculations, understanding that they only give rise to quarrels; 
2Ti 2:24 and a servant of the Lord must not engage in quarrels, but must be kind to everyone, a good teacher, 
and patient. 

2Ti 2:25 He must be gentle when he corrects people who oppose him, in the hope that God may give them a 
change of mind so that they recognise the truth 

2Ti 2:26 and come to their senses, escaping the trap of the devil who made them his captives and subjected 
them to his will. 

2Ti 3:1 You may be quite sure that in the last days there will be some difficult times. 

2Ti 3:2 People will be self-centred and avaricious, boastful, arrogant and rude; disobedient to their parents, 
ungrateful, irreligious; 

2Ti 3:3 heartless and intractable; they will be slanderers, profligates, savages and enemies of everything that is 
good; 

2Ti 3:4 they will be treacherous and reckless and demented by pride, preferring their own pleasure to God. 

2Ti 3:5 They will keep up the outward appearance of religion but will have rejected the inner power of it. Keep 
away from people like that. 

2Ti 3:6 Of the same kind, too, are those men who insinuate themselves into families in order to get influence 
over silly women who are obsessed with their sins and follow one craze after another, 

2Ti 3:7 always seeking learning, but unable ever to come to knowledge of the truth. 

2Ti 3:8 Just as Jannes and Jambres defied Moses, so these men defy the truth, their minds corrupt and their 
faith spurious. 

2Ti 3:9 But they will not be able to go on much longer: their folly, like that of the other two, must become obvious 
to everybody. 

2Ti 3:10 You, though, have followed my teaching, my way of life, my aims, my faith, my patience and my love, 
my perseverance 

2Ti 3:1 1 and the persecutions and sufferings that came to me in places like Antioch, Iconium and Lystra - all 
the persecutions I have endured; and the Lord has rescued me from every one of them. 

2Ti 3:12 But anybody who tries to live in devotion to Christ is certain to be persecuted; 

2Ti 3:13 while these wicked impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving others, and themselves deceived. 

2Ti 3:14 You must keep to what you have been taught and know to be true; remember who your teachers were, 
2Ti 3:15 and how, ever since you were a child, you have known the holy scriptures -from these you can learn 
the wisdom that leads to salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. 

2Ti 3:16 All scripture is inspired by God and useful for refuting error, for guiding people’s lives and teaching 
them to be upright. 

2Ti 3:17 This is how someöne who is dedicated to God becomes fully equipped and ready for any good work. 

2Ti 4:1 Before God and before Christ Jesus who is to be judge of the living and the dead, I charge you, in the 
name of his appearing and of his kingdom: 

2Ti 4:2 proclaim the message and, welcome or unwelcome, insist on it. Refute falsehood, correct error, give 



encouragement — but do all with patience and with care to instruct. 

2Ti 4:3 The time is sure to come when people will not accept sound teaching, but their ears will be itching for 
anything new and they will collect themselves a whole series of teachers according to their own tastes; 

2Ti 4:4 and then they will shut their ears to the truth and will turn to myths. 

2Ti 4:5 But you must keep steady all the time; put up with suffering; do the work of preaching the gospel; fulfil 
the service asked of you. 

2Ti 4:6 As for me, my life is already being poured away as a libation, and the time has come for me to depart. 
2Ti 4:7 I have fought the good fight to the end; I have run the race to the finish; I have kept the faith; 

2Ti 4:8 all there is to come for me now is the crown of uprightness which the Lord, the upright judge, will give to 
me on that Day; and not only to me but to all those who have longed for his appearing. 

2Ti 4:9 Make every effort to come and see me as soon as you can. 

2Ti 4:10 As it is, Demas has deserted me for love of this life and gone to Thessalonica, Crescens has gone to 
Galatia and Titus to Dalmatia; 

2Ti 4:1 1 only Luke is with me. Bring Mark with you; I find him a useful helper in my work. 

2Ti 4:12 I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus. 

2Ti 4:13 When you come, bring the cloak I left with Carpus in Troas, and the scrolls, especially the parchment 
ones. 

2Ti 4:14 Alexander the coppersmith has done me a lot of harm; the Lord will repay him as his deeds deserve. 
2Ti 4:15 Be on your guard against him yourself, because he has been bitterly contesting everything that we say. 
2Ti 4:16 The first time I had to present my defence, no one came into court to support me. Every one of them 
deserted me — may they not be held accountable for it. 

2Ti 4:17 But the Lord stood by me and gave me power, so that through me the message might be fully 
proclaimed for all the gentiles to hear; and so I was saved from the lion’s mouth. 

2Ti 4:18 The Lord will rescue me from all evil attempts on me, and bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom. To 
him be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

2Ti 4:19 Greetings to Prisca and Aquila, and the family of Onesiphorus. 

2Ti 4:20 Erastus stayed behind at Corinth, and I left Trophimus ill at Miletus. 

2Ti 4:21 Make every effort to come before the winter. Greetings to you from Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia 
and all the brothers. 

2Ti 4:22 The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you. 

Tit 1 : 1 From Paul, servant of God, an apostle of Jesus Christ to bring those whom God has chosen to faith and 
to the knowledge of the truth that leads to true religion, 

Tit 1 :2 and to give them the hope of the eternal life that was promised so long ago by God. He does not lie 
Tit 1:3 and so, in due time, he made known his message by a proclamation which was entrusted to me by the 
command of God our Saviour. 

Tit 1 :4 To Titus, true child of mine in the faith that we share. Grace and peace from God the Father and from 
Christ Jesus our Saviour. 

Tit 1 :5 The reason I left you behind in Crete was for you to organise everything that still had to be done and 
appoint elders in every town, in the way that I told you, 

Tit 1 :6 that is, each of them must be a man of irreproachable character, husband of one wife, and his children 
must be believers and not liable to be charged with disorderly conduct or insubordination. 

Tit 1:7 The presiding elder has to be irreproachable since he is God’s representative: never arrogant or hot- 
tempered, nor a heavy drinker or violent, nor avaricious; 

Tit 1 :8 but hospitable and a lover of goodness; sensible, upright, devout and self-controlled; 

Tit 1 :9 and he must have a firm grasp of the unchanging message of the tradition, so that he can be counted on 
both for giving encouragement in sound doctrine and for refuting those who argue against it. 

Tit 1:10 And in fact there are many people who are insubordinate, who talk nonsense and try to make others 
believe it, particularly among those of the circumcision. 

Tit 1:11 They must be silenced: people of this kind upset whole families, by teaching things that they ought not 
to, and doing it for the sake of sordid gain. 

Tit 1:12 It was one of themselves, one of their own prophets, who said, “Cretans were never anything but liars, 
dangerous animals, all greed and laziness”; 

Tit 1:13 and that is a true statement. So be severe in correcting them, and make them sound in the faith 
Tit 1:14 so that they stop taking notice of Jewish myths and the orders of people who turn away from the truth. 
Tit 1:15 To those who are pure themselves, everything is pure; but to those who have been corrupted and lack 
faith, nothing can be pure — the corruption is both in their minds and in their consciences. 

Tit 1:16 They claim to know God but by their works they deny him; they are outrageously rebellious and quite 
untrustworthy for any good work. 

Tit 2:1 It is for you, then, to preach the behaviour which goes with healthy doctrine. 



Tit 2:2 Older men should be reserved, dignified, moderate, sound in faith and love and perseverance. 

Tit 2:3 Similarly, older women should behave as befits religious people, with no scandal-mongering and no 
addiction to wine — they must be the teachers of right behaviour 

Tit 2:4 and show younger women how they should love their husbands and love their children, 

Tit 2:5 how they must be sensible and chaste, and how to work in their homes, and be gentle, and obey their 
husbands, so that the message of God is not disgraced. 

Tit 2:6 Similarly, urge younger men to be moderate in everything that they do, 

Tit 2:7 and you yourself set an example of good works, by sincerity and earnestness, when you are teaching, 
and by a message sound and irreproachable 

Tit 2:8 so that any opponent will be at a loss, with no accusation to make against us. 

Tit 2:9 Slaves must be obedient to their masters in everything, and do what is wanted without argument; 

Tit 2:10 and there must be no pilfering — they must show complete honesty at all times, so that they are in every 
way a credit to the teaching of God our Saviour. 

Tit 2:1 1 You see, God’s grace has been revealed to save the whole human race; 

Tit 2:12 it has taught us that we should give up everything contrary to true religion and all our worldly passions; 
we must be self-restrained and live upright and religious lives in this present world, 

Tit 2:13 waiting in hope for the blessing which will come with the appearing of the glory of our great God and 
Saviour Christ Jesus. 

Tit 2:14 He offered himself for us in order to ransom us from all our faults and to purify a people to be his very 
own and eager to do good. 

Tit 2:15 This is what you must say, encouraging or arguing with full authority; no one should despise you. 

Tit 3:1 Remind them to be obedient to the officials in authority; to be ready to do good at every opportunity; 

Tit 3:2 not to go slandering other people but to be peaceable and gentle, and always polite to people of all kinds. 
Tit 3:3 There was a time when we too were ignorant, disobedient and misled and enslaved by different passions 
and dissipations; we lived then in wickedness and malice, hating each other and hateful ourselves. 

Tit 3:4 But when the kindness and love of God our Saviour for humanity were revealed, 

Tit 3:5 it was not because of any upright actions we had done ourselves; it was for no reason except his own 
faithful love that he saved us, by means of the cleansing water of rebirth and renewal in the Holy Spirit 
Tit 3:6 which he has so generously poured over us through Jesus Christ our Saviour; 

Tit 3:7 so that, justified by his grace, we should become heirs in hope of eternal life. 

Tit 3:8 This is doctrine that you can rely on. I want you to be quite uncompromising in teaching all this, so that 
those who now believe in God may keep their minds constantly occupied in doing good works. All this is good, 
and useful for everybody. 

Tit 3:9 But avoid foolish speculations, and those genealogies, and the quibbles and disputes about the Law — 
they are useless and futile. 

Tit 3:10 If someöne disputes what you teach, then after a first and a second warning, have no more to do with 
him: 

Tit 3:1 1 you will know that anyone of that sort is warped and is self-condemned as a sinner. 

Tit 3:12 As soon as I have sent Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your best to join me at Nicopolis, where I have 
decided to spend the winter. 

Tit 3:13 Help eagerly on their way Zenas the lawyer and Apollos, and make sure they have everything they 
need. 

Tit 3:14 All our people must also learn to occupy themselves in doing good works for their practical needs, and 
not to be unproductive. 

Tit 3:15 All those who are with me send their greetings. Greetings to those who love us in the faith. Grace be 
with you all. 

Phm 1:1 From Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus and from our brother Timothy; to our dear fellow worker 
Philemon, 

Phm 1 :2 our sister Apphia, our fellow soldier Archippus and the church that meets in your house. 

Phm 1 :3 Grace and the peace of God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Phm 1:4 I always thank my God, mentioning you in my prayers, 

Phm 1 :5 because I hear of the love and the faith which you have for the Lord Jesus and for all God’s holy 
people. 

Phm 1 :6 I pray that your fellowship in faith may come to expression in full knowledge of all the good we can do 
for Christ. 

Phm 1 :7 I have received much joy and encouragement by your love; you have set the hearts of God’s holy 
people at rest. 

Phm 1 :8 Therefore, although in Christ I have no hesitations about telling you what your duty is, 

Phm 1:9 lam rather appealing to your love, being what I am, Paul, an old man, and now also a prisoner of 



Christ Jesus. 

Phm 1:10 lam appealing to you for a child of mine, whose father I became while wearing these chains: I mean 
Onesimus. 

Phm 1:11 He was of no use to you before, but now he is useful both to you and to me. 

Phm 1:12 lam sending him back to you — that is to say, sending you my own heart. 

Phm 1:13 I should have liked to keep him with me; he could have been a substitute for you, to help me while I 
am in the chains that the gospel has brought me. 

Phm 1:14 However, I did not want to do anything without your consent; it would have been forcing your act of 
kindness, which should be spontaneous. 

Phm 1:15 I suppose you have been deprived of Onesimus for a time, merely so that you could have him back 
for ever, 

Phm 1:16 no longer as a slave, but something much better than a slave, a dear brother; especially dear to me, 
but how much more to you, both on the natural plane and in the Lord. 

Phm 1:17 So if you grant me any fellowship with yourself, welcome him as you would me; 

Phm 1:18 if he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything, put it down to my account. 

Phm 1:19 lam writing this in my own hand: I, Paul, shall pay it back — 1 make no mention of a further debt, that 
you owe your very self to me! 

Phm 1:20 Well then, brother, I am counting on you, in the Lord; set my heart at rest, in Christ. 

Phm 1:21 I am writing with complete confidence in your compliance, sure that you will do even more than I ask. 
Phm 1 :22 There is another thing: will you get a place ready for me to stay in? I am hoping through your prayers 
to be restored to you. 

Phm 1 :23 Epaphras, a prisoner with me in Christ Jesus, sends his greetings; 

Phm 1:24 so do my fellow-workers Mark, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke. 

Phm 1 :25 May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. 

Heb 1:1 At many moments in the past and by many means, God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets; 
but 

Heb 1 :2 in our time, the final days, he has spoken to us in the person of his Son, whom he appointed heir of all 
things and through whom he made the ages. 

Heb 1 :3 He is the reflection of God’s glory and bears the impress of God’s own being, sustaining all things by 
his powerful command; and now that he has purged sins away, he has taken his seat at the right hand of the 
divine Majesty on high. 

Heb 1 :4 So he is now as far above the angels as the title which he has inherited is higher than their own name. 
Heb 1 :5 To which of the angels, then, has God ever said: You are my Son, today I have fathered you, or: I shall 
be a father to him and he a son to me? 

Heb 1 :6 Again, when he brings the First-born into the world, he says: Let all the angels of God pay him homage. 
Heb 1:7 To the angels, he says: appointing the winds his messengers and flames of fire his servants, 

Heb 1 :8 but to the Son he says: Your throne, God, is for ever and ever; and: the sceptre of his kingdom is a 
sceptre of justice; 

Heb 1:9 you love uprightness and detest evil. This is why God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of 
gladness, as none of your rivals. 

Heb 1:10 And again: Long ago, Lord, you laid earth’s foundations, the heavens are the work of your hands. 

Heb 1:11 They pass away but you remain, they all wear out like a garment. 

Heb 1:12 Like a cloak you will roll them up, like a garment, and they will be changed. But you never alter and 
your years are unending. 

Heb 1:13 To which of the angels has God ever said: Take your seat at my right hand till I have made your 
enemies your footstool? 

Heb 1:14 Are they not all ministering spirits, sent to serve for the sake of those who are to inherit salvation? 

Heb 2:1 We ought, then, to turn our minds more attentively than before to what we have been taught, so that we 
do not drift away. 

Heb 2:2 If a message that was spoken through angels proved to be so reliable that every infringement and 
disobedience brought its own proper punishment, 

Heb 2:3 then we shall certainly not go unpunished if we neglect such a great salvation. It was first announced by 
the Lord himself, and is guaranteed to us by those who heard him; 

Heb 2:4 God himself confirmed their witness with signs and marvels and miracles of all kinds, and by 
distributing the gifts of the Holy Spirit in the various ways he wills. 

Heb 2:5 It was not under angels that he put the world to come, about which we are speaking. 

Heb 2:6 Someöne witnesses to this somewhere with the words: What are human beings that you spare a 
thought for them, a child of Adam that you care for him? 

Heb 2:7 For a short while you have made him less than the angels; you have crowned him with glory and 



honour, 

Heb 2:8 put all things under his feet. For in putting all things under him he made no exceptions. At present, it is 
true, we are not able to see that all things are under him, 

Heb 2:9 but we do see Jesus, who was for a short while made less than the angels, now crowned with glory and 
honour because he submitted to death; so that by God’s grace his experience of death should benefit all 
humanity. 

Heb 2:10 It was fitting that God, for whom and through whom everything exists, should, in bringing many sons to 
glory, make perfect through suffering the leader of their salvation. 

Heb 2:11 For consecrator and consecrated are all of the same stock; that is why he is not ashamed to call them 
brothers 

Heb 2:12 in the text: I shall proclaim your name to my brothers, praise you in full assembly; or in the text: 

Heb 2:13 I shall put my hope in him; followed by Look, I and the children whom God has given me. 

Heb 2:14 Since all the children share the same human nature, he too shared equally in it, so that by his death 
he could set aside him who held the power of death, namely the devil, 

Heb 2:15 and set free all those who had been held in slavery all their lives by the fear of death. 

Heb 2:16 For it was not the angels that he took to himself; he took to himself the line of Abraham. 

Heb 2:17 It was essential that he should in this way be made completely like his brothers so that he could 
become a compassionate and trustworthy high priest for their relationship to God, able to expiate the sins of the 
people. 

Heb 2:18 For the suffering he himself passed through while being put to the test enables him to help others 
when they are being put to the test. 

Heb 3:1 That is why all you who are holy brothers and share the same heavenly call should turn your minds to 
Jesus, the apostle and the high priest of our profession of faith. 

Heb 3:2 He was trustworthy to the one who appointed him, just like Moses, who remained trustworthy in all his 
household; 

Heb 3:3 but he deserves a greater glory than Moses, just as the builder of a house is more honoured than the 
house itself. 

Heb 3:4 Every house is built by someöne, of course; but God built everything that exists. 

Heb 3:5 It is true that Moses was trustworthy in the household of God, as a servant is, acting as witness to the 
things which were yet to be revealed, 

Heb 3:6 but Christ is trustworthy as a son is, over his household. And we are his household, as long as we 
fearlessly maintain the hope in which we glory. 

Heb 3:7 That is why, as the Holy Spirit says: If only you would listen to him today! 

Heb 3:8 Do not harden your hearts, as at the rebellion, as at the time of testing in the desert, 

Heb 3:9 when your ancestors challenged me, and put me to the test, and saw what I could do 

Heb 3:10 for forty years. That was why that generation sickened me and I said, “Always fickle hearts, that 

cannot grasp my ways!”. 

Heb 3:1 1 And then in my anger I swore that they would never enter my place of rest. 

Heb 3:12 Take care, brothers, that none of you ever has a wicked heart, so unbelieving as to turn away from the 
living God. 

Heb 3:13 Every day, as long as this today lasts, keep encouraging one another so that none of you is hardened 
by the lure of sin, 

Heb 3:14 because we have been granted a share with Christ only if we keep the grasp of our first confidence 
firm to the end. 

Heb 3:15 In this saying: If only you would listen to him today; do not harden your hearts, as at the Rebellion, 

Heb 3:16 who was it who listened and then rebelled? Surely all those whom Moses led out of Egypt. 

Heb 3:17 And with whom was he angry for forty years? Surely with those who sinned and whose dead bodies 
fell in the desert. 

Heb 3:18 To whom did he swear they would never enter his place of rest? Surely those who would not believe. 
Heb 3:19 So we see that it was their refusal to believe which prevented them from entering. 

Heb 4:1 Let us beware, then: since the promise never lapses, none of you must think that he has come too late 
for the promise of entering his place of rest. 

Heb 4:2 We received the gospel exactly as they did; but hearing the message did them no good because they 
did not share the faith of those who did listen. 

Heb 4:3 We, however, who have faith, are entering a place of rest, as in the text: And then in my anger I swore 
that they would never enter my place of rest. Now God’s work was all finished at the beginning of the world; 

Heb 4:4 as one text says, referring to the seventh day: And God rested on the seventh day after all the work he 
had been doing. 

Heb 4:5 And, again, the passage above says: They will never reach my place of rest. 



Heb 4:6 It remains the case, then, that there would be some people who would reach it, and since those who 
first heard the good news were prevented from entering by their refusal to believe, 

Heb 4:7 God fixed another day, a Today, when he said through David in the text already quoted: If only you 
would listen to him today; do not harden your hearts. 

Heb 4:8 If Joshua had led them into this place of rest, God would not later have spoken of another day. 

Heb 4:9 There must still be, therefore, a seventh-day rest reserved for God’s people, 

Heb 4:10 since to enter the place of rest is to rest after your work, as God did after his. 

Heb 4:1 1 Let us, then, press forward to enter this place of rest, or some of you might copy this example of 
refusal to believe and be lost. 

Heb 4:12 The word of God is something alive and active: it cuts more incisively than any two-edged sword: it 
can seek out the place where soul is divided from spirit, or joints from marrow; it can pass judgement on secret 
emotions and thoughts. 

Heb 4:13 No created thing is hidden from him; everything is uncovered and stretched fully open to the eyes of 
the one to whom we must give account of ourselves. 

Heb 4:14 Since in Jesus, the Son of God, we have the supreme high priest who has gone through to the highest 
heaven, we must hold firm to our profession of faith. 

Heb 4:15 For the high priest we have is not incapable of feeling our weaknesses with us, but has been put to 
the test in exactly the same way as ourselves, apart from sin. 

Heb 4:16 Let us, then, have no fear in approaching the throne of grace to receive mercy and to find grace when 
we are in need of help. 

Heb 5:1 Every high priest is taken from among human beings and is appointed to act on their behalf in 
relationships with God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins; 

Heb 5:2 he can sympathise with those who are ignorant or who have gone astray, because he too is subject to 
the limitations of weakness. 

Heb 5:3 That is why he has to make sin offerings for himself as well as for the people. 

Heb 5:4 No one takes this honour on himself; it needs a call from God, as in Aaron’s case. 

Heb 5:5 And so it was not Christ who gave himself the glory of becoming high priest, but the one who said to 
him: You are my Son, today I have fathered you, 

Heb 5:6 and in another text: You are a priest for ever, of the order of Melchizedek. 

Heb 5:7 During his life on earth, he offered up prayer and entreaty, with loud cries and with tears, to the one 
who had the power to save him from death, and, winning a hearing by his reverence, 

Heb 5:8 he learnt obedience, Son though he was, through his sufferings; 

Heb 5:9 when he had been perfected, he became for all who obey him the source of eternal salvation 
Heb 5:10 and was acclaimed by God with the title of high priest of the order of Melchizedek. 

Heb 5:1 1 On this subject we have many things to say, and they are difficult to explain because you have grown 
so slow at understanding. 

Heb 5:12 Indeed, when you should by this time have become masters, you need someöne to teach you all over 
again the elements of the principles of God’s sayings; you have gone back to needing milk, and not solid food. 
Heb 5:13 T ruly, no one who is still living on milk can digest the doctrine of saving justice, being still a baby. 

Heb 5:14 Solid food is for adults with minds trained by practice to distinguish between good and bad. 

Heb 6:1 Let us leave behind us then all the elementary teaching about Christ and go on to its completion, 
without going over the fundamental doctrines again: the turning away from dead actions, faith in God, 

Heb 6:2 the teaching about baptisms and the laying — on of hands, about the resurrection of the dead and 
eternal judgement. 

Heb 6:3 This, God willing, is what we propose to do. 

Heb 6:4 As for those people who were once brought into the light, and tasted the gift from heaven, and received 
a share of the Holy Spirit, 

Heb 6:5 and tasted the goodness of God’s message and the powers of the world to come 
Heb 6:6 and yet in spite of this have fallen away — it is impossible for them to be brought to the freshness of 
repentance a second time, since they are crucifying the Son of God again for themselves, and making a public 
exhibition of him. 

Heb 6:7 A field that drinks up the rain that has fallen frequently on it, and yields the crops that are wanted by the 
owners who grew them, receives God’s blessing; 

Heb 6:8 but one that grows brambles and thistles is worthless, and near to being cursed. It will end by being 
burnt. 

Heb 6:9 But you, my dear friends — in spite of what we have just said, we are sure you are in a better state and 
on the way to salvation. 

Heb 6:10 God would not be so unjust as to forget all you have done, the love that you have for his name or the 
services you have done, and are still doing, for the holy people of God. 



Heb 6:11 Our desire is that every one of you should go on showing the same enthusiasm till the ultimate 
fulfilment of your hope, 

Heb 6:12 never growing careless, but taking as your model those who by their faith and perseverance are heirs 
of the promises. 

Heb 6:13 When God made the promise to Abraham, he swore by his own self, since there was no one greater 
he could swear by: 

Heb 6:14 I will shower blessings on you and give you many descendants. 

Heb 6:15 Because of that, Abraham persevered and received fulfilment of the promise. 

Heb 6:16 Human beings, of course, swear an oath by something greater than themselves, and between them, 
confirmation by an oath puts an end to all dispute. 

Heb 6:17 In the same way, when God wanted to show the heirs of the promise even more clearly how 
unalterable his plan was, he conveyed it by an oath 

Heb 6:18 so that through two unalterable factors in which God could not be lying, we who have fled to him might 
have a vigorous encouragement to grasp the hope held out to us. 

Heb 6:19 This is the anchor our souls have, reaching right through inside the curtain 

Heb 6:20 where Jesus has entered as a forerunner on our behalf, having become a high priest for ever, of the 
order of Melchizedek. 

Heb 7:1 Melchizedek, king of Salem, a priest of God Most High, came to meet Abraham when he returned from 
defeating the kings, and blessed him; 

Heb 7:2 and Abraham gave him a tenth of everything. By the interpretation of his name, he is, first, “king of 
saving justice” and also king of Salem, that is, “king of peace”; 

Heb 7:3 he has no father, mother or ancestry, and his life has no beginning or ending; he is like the Son of God. 
He remains a priest for ever. 

Heb 7:4 Now think how great this man must have been, if the patriarch Abraham gave him a tenth of the finest 
plunder. 

Heb 7:5 We know that any of the descendants of Levi who are admitted to the priesthood are obliged by the 
Law to take tithes from the people, that is, from their own brothers although they too are descended from 
Abraham. 

Heb 7:6 But this man, who was not of the same descent, took his tithe from Abraham, and he gave his blessing 
to the holder of the promises. 

Heb 7:7 Now it is indisputable that a blessing is given by a superior to an inferior. 

Heb 7:8 Further, in the normal case it is ordinary mortal men who receive the tithes, whereäs in that case it was 
one who is attested as being alive. 

Heb 7:9 It could be said that Levi himself, who receives tithes, actually paid tithes, in the person of Abraham, 
Heb 7:10 because he was still in the loins of his ancestor when Melchizedek came to meet him. 

Heb 7:1 1 Now if perfection had been reached through the levitical priesthood — and this was the basis of the 
Law given to the people — why was it necessary for a different kind of priest to arise, spoken of as being of the 
order of Melchizedek rather than of the order of Aaron? 

Heb 7:12 Any change in the priesthood must mean a change in the Law as well. 

Heb 7:13 So our Lord, of whom these things were said, belonged to a different tribe, the members of which 
have never done service at the altar; 

Heb 7:14 everyone knows he came from Judah, a tribe which Moses did not mention at all when dealing with 
priests. 

Heb 7:15 This becomes even more clearly evident if another priest, of the type of Melchizedek, arises who is a 
priest 

Heb 7:16 not in virtue of a law of physical descent, but in virtue of the power of an indestructible life. 

Heb 7:17 For he is attested by the prophecy: You are a priest for ever of the order of Melchizedek. 

Heb 7:18 The earlier commandment is thus abolished, because of its weakness and ineffectiveness 

Heb 7:19 since the Law could not make anything perfect; but now this commandment is replaced by something 

better-the hope that brings us close to God. 

Heb 7:20 Now the former priests became priests without any oath being sworn, 

Heb 7:21 but this one with the swearing of an oath by him who said to him, The Lord has sworn an oath he will 
never retract: you are a priest for ever; 

Heb 7:22 the very fact that it occurred with the swearing of an oath makes the covenant of which Jesus is the 
guarantee all the greater. 

Heb 7:23 Further, the former priests were many in number, because death put an end to each one of them; 

Heb 7:24 but this one, because he remains for ever, has a perpetual priesthood. 

Heb 7:25 It follows, then, that his power to save those who come to God through him is absolute, since he lives 
for ever to intercede for them. 



Heb 7:26 Such is the high priest that met our need, holy, innocent and uncontaminated, set apart from sinners, 
and raised up above the heavens; 

Heb 7:27 he has no need to offer sacrifices every day, as the high priests do, first for their own sins and only 
then for those of the people; this he did once and for all by offering himself. 

Heb 7:28 The Law appoints high priests who are men subject to weakness; but the promise on oath, which 
came after the Law, appointed the Son who is made perfect for ever. 

Heb 8:1 The principal point of all that we have said is that we have a high priest of exactly this kind. He has 
taken his seat at the right of the throne of divine Majesty in the heavens, 

Heb 8:2 and he is the minister of the sanctuary and of the true Tent which the Lord, and not any man, set up. 
Heb 8:3 Every high priest is constituted to offer gifts and sacrifices, and so this one too must have something to 
offer. 

Heb 8:4 In fact, if he were on earth, he would not be a priest at all, since there are others who make the 
offerings laid down by the Law, 

Heb 8:5 though these maintain the service only of a model or a reflection of the heavenly realities; just as 
Moses, when he had the Tent to build, was warned by God who said: See that you work to the design that was 
shown you on the mountain. 

Heb 8:6 As it is, he has been given a ministry as far superior as is the covenant of which he is the mediator, 
which is founded on better promises. 

Heb 8:7 If that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no room for a second one to replace it. 
Heb 8:8 And in fact God does find fault with them; he says: Look, the days are coming, the Lord declares, when 
I will make a new covenant with the House of Israel and the House of Judah, 

Heb 8:9 but not a covenant like the one I made with their ancestors, the day I took them by the hand to bring 
them out of Egypt, which covenant of mine they broke, and I too abandoned them, the Lord declares. 

Heb 8:10 No, this is the covenant I will make with the House of Israel, when those days have come, the Lord 
declares: In their minds I shall plant my laws writing them on their hearts. Then I shall be their God, and they 
shall be my people. 

Heb 8:1 1 There will be no further need for each to teach his neighbour, and each his brother, saying “Learn to 
know the Lord!”. No, they will all know me, from the least to the greatest, 

Heb 8:12 since I shall forgive their guilt and never more call their sins to mind. 

Heb 8:13 By speaking of a new covenant, he implies that the first one is old. And anything old and ageing is 
ready to disappear. 

Heb 9:1 The first covenant also had its laws governing worship and its sanctuary, a sanctuary on this earth. 

Heb 9:2 There was a tent which comprised two compartments: the first, in which the lamp-stand, the table and 
the loaves of permanent offering were kept, was called the Holy Place; 

Heb 9:3 then beyond the second veil, a second compartment which was called the Holy of Holies 

Heb 9:4 to which belonged the gold altar of incense, and the ark of the covenant, plated all over with gold. In 

this were kept the gold jar containing the manna, Aaron’s branch that grew the buds, and the tables of the 

covenant. 

Heb 9:5 On top of it were the glorious winged creatures, overshadowing the throne of mercy. This is not the time 
to go into detail about this. 

Heb 9:6 Linder these provisions, priests go regularly into the outer tent to carry out their acts of worship, 

Heb 9:7 but the second tent is entered only once a year, and then only by the high priest who takes in the blood 
to make an offering for his own and the people’s faults of inadvertence. 

Heb 9:8 By this, the Holy Spirit means us to see that as long as the old tent stands, the way into the holy place 
is not opened up; 

Heb 9:9 it is a symbol for this present time. None of the gifts and sacrifices offered under these regulations can 
possibly bring any worshipper to perfection in his conscience; 

Heb 9:10 they are rules about outward life, connected with food and drink and washing at various times, which 
are in force only until the time comes to set things right. 

Heb 9:1 1 But now Christ has come, as the high priest of all the blessings which were to come. He has passed 
through the greater, the more perfect tent, not made by human hands, that is, not of this created order; 

Heb 9:12 and he has entered the sanctuary once and for all, taking with him not the blood of goats and bull 
calves, but his own blood, having won an eternal redemption. 

Heb 9:13 The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkled on those who have incurred 
defilement, may restore their bodily purity. 

Heb 9:14 How much more will the blood of Christ, who offered himself, blameless as he was, to God through 
the eternal Spirit, purify our conscience from dead actions so that we can worship the living God. 

Heb 9:15 This makes him the mediator of a new covenant, so that, now that a death has occurred to redeem the 
sins committed under an earlier covenant, those who have been called to an eternal inheritance may receive the 



promise. 

Heb 9:16 Now wherever a will is in question, the death of the testator must be established; 

Heb 9:17 a testament comes into effect only after a death, since it has no force while the testator is still alive. 
Heb 9:18 That is why even the earlier covenant was inaugurated with blood, 

Heb 9:19 and why, after Moses had promulgated all the commandments of the Law to the people, he took the 
calves’ blood, the goats’ blood and some water, and with these he sprinkled the book itself and all the people, 
using scarlet wool and hyssop; 

Heb 9:20 saying as he did so: This is the blood of the covenant that God has made with you. 

Heb 9:21 And he sprinkled both the tent and all the liturgical vessels with blood in the same way. 

Heb 9:22 In fact, according to the Law, practically every purification takes place by means of blood; and if there 
is no shedding of blood, there is no remission. 

Heb 9:23 Only the copies of heavenly things are purified in this way; the heavenly things themselves have to be 
purified by a higher sort of sacrifice than this. 

Heb 9:24 It is not as though Christ had entered a man-made sanctuary which was merely a model of the real 
one; he entered heaven itself, so that he now appears in the presence of God on our behalf. 

Heb 9:25 And he does not have to offer himself again and again, as the high priest goes into the sanctuary year 
after year with the blood that is not his own, 

Heb 9:26 or else he would have had to suffer over and over again since the world began. As it is, he has made 
his appearance once and for all, at the end of the last age, to do away with sin by sacrificing himself. 

Heb 9:27 Since human beings die only once, after which comes judgement, 

Heb 9:28 so Christ too, having offered himself only once to bear the sin of many, will manifest himself a second 
time, sin being no more, to those who are waiting for him, to bring them salvation. 

Heb 10:1 So, since the Law contains no more than a reflection of the good things which were still to come, and 
no true image of them, it is quite incapable of bringing the worshippers to perfection, by means of the same 
sacrifices repeatedly offered year after year. 

Heb 10:2 Otherwise, surely the offering of them would have stopped, because the worshippers, when they had 
been purified once, would have no awareness of sins. 

Heb 10:3 But in fact the sins are recalled year after year in the sacrifices. 

Heb 10:4 Bulls’ blood and goats’ blood are incapable of taking away sins, 

Heb 10:5 and that is why he said, on coming into the world: You wanted no sacrifice or cereal offering, but you 
gave me a body. 

Heb 1 0:6 You took no pleasure in burnt offering or sacrifice for sin; 

Heb 1 0:7 then I said, “Here I am, I am coming”, in the scroll of the book it is written of me, to do your will, God. 
Heb 10:8 He says first You did not want what the Law lays down as the things to be offered, that is: the 
sacrifices, the cereal offerings, the burnt offerings and the sacrifices for sin, and you took no pleasure in them; 
Heb 1 0:9 and then he says: Here I am! I am coming to do your will. He is abolishing the first sort to establish the 
second. 

Heb 10:10 And this will was for us to be made holy by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ made once and 
for all. 

Heb 10:1 1 Every priest stands at his duties every day, offering over and over again the same sacrifices which 
are quite incapable of taking away sins. 

Heb 10:12 He, on the other hand, has offered one single sacrifice for sins, and then taken his seat for ever, at 
the right hand of God, 

Heb 10:13 where he is now waiting till his enemies are made his footstool. 

Heb 10:14 By virtue of that one single offering, he has achieved the eternal perfection of all who are sanctified. 
Heb 10:15 The Holy Spirit attests this to us, for after saying: 

Heb 10:16 No, this is the covenant I will make with them, when those days have come, the Lord says: In their 
minds I will plant my Laws writing them on their hearts, 

Heb 10:17 and I shall never more call their sins to mind, or their offences. 

Heb 10:18 When these have been forgiven, there can be no more sin offerings. 

Heb 10:19 We have then, brothers, complete confidence through the blood of Jesus in entering the sanctuary, 
Heb 1 0:20 by a new way which he has opened for us, a living opening through the curtain, that is to say, his 
flesh. 

Heb 1 0:21 And we have the high priest over all the sanctuary of God. 

Heb 10:22 So as we go in, let us be sincere in heart and filled with faith, our hearts sprinkled and free from any 
trace of bad conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. 

Heb 10:23 Let us keep firm in the hope we profess, because the one who made the promise is trustworthy. 

Heb 10:24 Let us be concerned for each other, to stir a response in love and good works. 

Heb 1 0:25 Do not absent yourself from your own assemblies, as some do, but encourage each other; the more 



so as you see the Day drawing near. 

Heb 10:26 If, after we have been given knowledge of the truth, we should deliberately commit any sins, then 
there is no longer any sacrifice for them. 

Heb 10:27 There is left only the dreadful prospect of judgement and of the fiery wrath that is to devour your 
enemies. 

Heb 10:28 Anyone who disregards the Law of Moses is ruthlessly put to death on the word of two witnesses or 
three; 

Heb 10:29 and you may be sure that anyone who tramples on the Son of God, and who treats the blood of the 
covenant which sanctified him as if it were not holy, and who insults the Spirit of grace, will be condemned to a 
far severer punishment. 

Heb 10:30 We are all aware who it was that said: Vengeance is mine; I will pay them back. And again: The Lord 
will vindicate his people. 

Heb 1 0:31 It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 

Heb 1 0:32 Remember the great challenge of the sufferings that you had to meet after you received the light, in 
earlier days; 

Heb 10:33 sometimes by being yourselves publicly exposed to humiliations and violence, and sometimes as 
associates of others who were treated in the same way. 

Heb 10:34 For you not only shared in the sufferings of those who were in prison, but you accepted with joy 
being stripped of your belongings, knowing that you owned something that was better and lasting. 

Heb 10:35 Do not lose your fearlessness now, then, since the reward is so great. 

Heb 10:36 You will need perseverance if you are to do God’s will and gain what he has promised. 

Heb 10:37 Only a little while now, a very little while, for come he certainly will before too long. 

Heb 10:38 My upright person will live through faith but if he draws back, my soul will take no pleasure in him. 

Heb 10:39 We are not the sort of people who draw back, and are lost by it; we are the sort who keep faith until 

our souls are saved. 

Heb 11:1 Only faith can guarantee the blessings that we hope for, or prove the existence of realities that are 
unseen. 

Heb 1 1 :2 It is for their faith that our ancestors are acknowledged. 

Heb 11:3 It is by faith that we understand that the ages were created by a word from God, so that from the 
invisible the visible world came to be. 

Heb 1 1 :4 It was because of his faith that Abel offered God a better sacrifice than Cain, and for that he was 
acknowledged as upright when God himself made acknowledgement of his offerings. Though he is dead, he still 
speaks by faith. 

Heb 11:5 It was because of his faith that Enoch was taken up and did not experience death: he was no more, 
because God took him; because before his assumption he was acknowledged to have pleased God. 

Heb 1 1 :6 Now it is impossible to please God without faith, since anyone who comes to him must believe that he 
exists and rewards those who seek him. 

Heb 11:7 It was through his faith that Noah, when he had been warned by God of something that had never 
been seen before, took care to build an ark to save his family. His faith was a judgement on the world, and he 
was able to claim the uprightness which comes from faith. 

Heb 11:8 It was by faith that Abraham obeyed the call to set out for a country that was the inheritance given to 
him and his descendants, and that he set out without knowing where he was going. 

Heb 11:9 By faith he sojourned in the Promised Land as though it were not his, living in tents with Isaac and 
Jacob, who were heirs with him of the same promise. 

Heb 11:10 He looked forward to the well-founded city, designed and built by God. 

Heb 11:11 It was equally by faith that Sarah, in spite of being past the age, was made able to conceive, 
because she believed that he who had made the promise was faithful to it. 

Heb 11:12 Because of this, there came from one man, and one who already had the mark of death on him, 
descendants as numerous as the stars of heaven and the grains of sand on the seashore which cannot be 
counted. 

Heb 11:13 All these died in faith, before receiving any of the things that had been promised, but they saw them 
in the far distance and welcomed them, recognising that they were only strangers and nomads on earth. 

Heb 1 1:14 People who use such terms about themselves make it quite plain that they are in search of a 
homeland. 

Heb 11:15 If they had meant the country they came from, they would have had the opportunity to return to it; 
Heb 11:16 but in fact they were longing for a better homeland, their heavenly homeland. That is why God is not 
ashamed to be called their God, since he has founded the city for them. 

Heb 11:17 It was by faith that Abraham, when put to the test, offered up Isaac. He offered to sacrifice his only 
son even though he had yet to receive what had been promised, 



Heb 11:18 and he had been told: Isaac is the one through whom your name will be carried on. 

Heb 11:19 He was confident that God had the power even to raise the dead; and so, figuratively speaking, he 
was given back Isaac from the dead. 

Heb 1 1 :20 It was by faith that this same Isaac gave his blessing to Jacob and Esau for the still distant future. 

Heb 1 1 :21 By faith Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of Joseph’s sons, bowed in reverence, as he leant 
on his staff. 

Heb 1 1 :22 It was by faith that, when he was about to die, Joseph mentioned the Exodus of the Israelites and 
gave instructions about his own remains. 

Heb 1 1 :23 It was by faith that Moses, when he was born, was kept hidden by his parents for three months; 
because they saw that he was a fine child; they were not afraid of the royal edict. 

Heb 1 1 :24 It was by faith that, when he was grown up, Moses refused to be known as the son of Pharaoh’s 
daughter 

Heb 1 1 :25 and chose to be ill-treated in company with God’s people rather than to enjoy the transitory pleasures 
of sin. 

Heb 1 1 :26 He considered that the humiliations offered to the Anointed were something more precious than all 
the treasures of Egypt, because he had his eyes fixed on the reward. 

Heb 1 1 :27 It was by faith that he left Egypt without fear of the king’s anger; he held to his purpose like someöne 
who could see the Invisible. 

Heb 1 1 :28 It was by faith that he kept the Passover and sprinkled the blood to prevent the Destroyer from 
touching any of their first-born sons. 

Heb 1 1 :29 It was by faith they crossed the Red Sea as easily as dry land, while the Egyptians, trying to do the 
same, were drowned. 

Heb 1 1 :30 It was through faith that the walls of Jericho fell down when the people had marched round them for 
seven days. 

Heb 1 1 :31 It was by faith that Rahab the prostitute welcomed the spies and so was not killed with the 
unbelievers. 

Heb 1 1 :32 What more shall I say? There is not time for me to give an account of Gideon, Barak, Samson, 
Jephthah, or of David, Samuel and the prophets. 

Heb 1 1 :33 These were men who through faith conquered kingdoms, did what was upright and earned the 
promises. They could keep a lion’s mouth shut, 

Heb 1 1 :34 put out blazing fires and emerge unscathed from battle. They were weak people who were given 
strength to be brave in war and drive back foreign invaders. 

Heb 1 1 :35 Some returned to their wives from the dead by resurrection; and others submitted to torture, refusing 
release so that they would rise again to a better life. 

Heb 1 1 :36 Some had to bear being pilloried and flogged, or even chained up in prison. 

Heb 1 1 :37 They were stoned, or sawn in half, or killed by the sword; they were homeless, and wore only the 
skins of sheep and goats; they were in want and hardship, and maltreated. 

Heb 1 1 :38 They were too good for the world and they wandered in deserts and mountains and in caves and 
ravines. 

Heb 1 1 :39 These all won acknowledgement through their faith, but they did not receive what was promised, 

Heb 1 1 :40 since God had made provision for us to have something better, and they were not to reach perfection 
except with us. 

Heb 12:1 With so many witnesses in a great cloud all around us, we too, then, should throw off everything that 
weighs us down and the sin that clings so closely, and with perseverance keep running in the race which lies 
ahead of us. 

Heb 1 2:2 Let us keep our eyes fixed on Jesus, who leads us in our faith and brings it to perfection: for the sake 
of the joy which lay ahead of him, he endured the cross, disregarding the shame of it, and has taken his seat at 
the right of God’s throne. 

Heb 12:3 Think of the way he persevered against such opposition from sinners and then you will not lose heart 
and come to grief. 

Heb 12:4 In the fight against sin, you have not yet had to keep fighting to the point of bloodshed. 

Heb 12:5 Have you forgotten that encouraging text in which you are addressed as sons? My son, do not scorn 
correction from the Lord, do not resent his training, 

Heb 12:6 for the Lord trains those he loves, and chastises every son he accepts. 

Heb 12:7 Perseverance is part of your training; God is treating you as his sons. Has there ever been any son 
whose father did not train him? 

Heb 12:8 If you were not getting this training, as all of you are, then you would be not sons but bastards. 

Heb 12:9 Besides, we have all had our human fathers who punished us, and we respected them for it; all the 
more readily ought we to submit to the Father of spirits, and so earn life. 



Heb 12:10 Our human fathers were training us for a short life and according to their own lights; but he does it all 
for our own good, so that we may share his own holiness. 

Heb 12:1 1 Of course, any discipline is at the time a matter for grief, not joy; but later, in those who have 
undergone it, it bears fruit in peace and uprightness. 

Heb 12:12 So steady all weary hands and trembling knees 

Heb 12:13 and make your crooked paths straight; then the injured limb will not be maimed, it will get better 
instead. 

Heb 12:14 Seek peace with all people, and the holiness without which no one can ever see the Lord. 

Heb 12:15 Be careful that no one is deprived of the grace of God and that no root of bitterness should begin to 
grow and make trouble; this can poison a large number. 

Heb 12:16 And be careful that there is no immoral person, or anyone worldly minded like Esau, who sold his 
birthright for one single meal. 

Heb 12:17 As you know, when he wanted to obtain the blessing afterwards, he was rejected and, though he 
pleaded for it with tears, he could find no way of reversing the decision. 

Heb 12:18 What you have come to is nothing known to the senses: not a blazing fire, or gloom or total 
darkness, or a storm; 

Heb 12:19 or trumpet-blast or the sound of a voice speaking which made everyone that heard it beg that no 
more should be said to them. 

Heb 1 2:20 They could not bear the order that was given: If even a beast touches the mountain, it must be 
stoned. 

Heb 12:21 The whole scene was so terrible that Moses said, “I am afraid and trembling”. 

Heb 1 2:22 But what you have come to is Mount Zion and the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem 
where the millions of angels have gathered for the festival, 

Heb 12:23 with the whole Church of first-born sons, enrolled as citizens of heaven. You have come to God 
himself, the supreme Judge, and to the spirits of the upright who have been made perfect; 

Heb 12:24 and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to purifying blood which pleads more insistently 
than Abel’s. 

Heb 12:25 Make sure that you never refuse to listen when he speaks. If the people who on earth refused to 
listen to a warning could not escape their punishment, how shall we possibly escape if we turn away from a 
voice that warns us from heaven? 

Heb 12:26 That time his voice made the earth shake, but now he has given us this promise: I am going to shake 
the earth once more and not only the earth but heaven as well. 

Heb 12:27 The words once more indicate the removal of what is shaken, since these are created things, so that 
what is not shaken remains. 

Heb 12:28 We have been given possession of an unshakeable kingdom. Let us therefore be grateful and use 
our gratitude to worship God in the way that pleases him, in reverence and fear. 

Heb 12:29 For our God is a consuming fire. 

Heb 13:1 Continue to love each other like brothers, 

Heb 13:2 and remember always to welcome strangers, for by doing this, some people have entertained angels 
without knowing it. 

Heb 13:3 Keep in mind those who are in prison, as though you were in prison with them; and those who are 
being badly treated, since you too are in the body. 

Heb 13:4 Marriage must be honoured by all, and marriages must be kept undefiled, because the sexually 
immoral and adulterers will come under God’s judgement. 

Heb 1 3:5 Put avarice out of your lives and be content with whatever you have; God himself has said: I shall not 
fail you or desert you, 

Heb 13:6 and so we can say with confidence: With the Lord on my side, I fear nothing: what can human beings 
do to me? 

Heb 13:7 Remember your leaders, who preached the word of God to you, and as you reflect on the outcome of 
their lives, take their faith as your model. 

Heb 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same today as he was yesterday and as he will be for ever. 

Heb 13:9 Do not be led astray by all sorts of strange doctrines: it is better to rely on grace for inner strength than 
on food, which has done no good to those who concentrate on it. 

Heb 13:10 We have our own altar from which those who serve the Tent have no right to eat. 

Heb 13:1 1 The bodies of the animals whose blood is taken into the sanctuary by the high priest for the rite of 
expiation are burnt outside the camp, 

Heb 13:12 and so Jesus too suffered outside the gate to sanctify the people with his own blood. 

Heb 13:13 Let us go to him, then, outside the camp, and bear his humiliation. 

Heb 13:14 There is no permanent city for us here; we are looking for the one which is yet to be. 



Heb 13:15 Through him, let us offer God an unending sacrifice of praise, the fruit of the lips of those who 
acknowledge his name. 

Heb 13:16 Keep doing good works and sharing your resources, for these are the kinds of sacrifice that please 
God. 

Heb 13:17 Obey your leaders and give way to them; they watch over your souls because they must give an 
account of them; make this a joy for them to do, and not a grief — you yourselves would be the losers. 

Heb 13:18 Pray for us; we are sure that our own conscience is clear and we are certainly determined to behave 
honourably in everything we do. 

Heb 13:19 I ask you very particularly to pray that I may come back to you all the sooner. 

Heb 13:20 I pray that the God of peace, who brought back from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of 
the sheep, by the blood that sealed an eternal covenant, 

Heb 13:21 may prepare you to do his will in every kind of good action; effecting in us all whatever is acceptable 
to himself through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

Heb 13:22 I urge you, brothers, to take these words of encouragement kindly; that is why I have written to you 
briefly. 

Heb 1 3:23 I want you to know that our brother Timothy has been set free. If he arrives in time, he will be with me 
when I see you. 

Heb 13:24 Greetings to all your leaders and to all God’s holy people. God’s holy people in Italy send you 
greetings. 

Heb 13:25 Grace be with you all. 


1 Pe 1:1 Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ, to all those living as aliens in the Dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, 
Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, who have been chosen, 

1 Pe 1:2 in the foresight of God the Father, to be made holy by the Spirit, obedient to Jesus Christ and sprinkled 
with his blood: Grace and peace be yours in abundance. 

1 Pe 1 :3 Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in his great mercy has given us a new birth 
into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead 

1 Pe 1 :4 and into a heritage that can never be spoilt or soiled and never fade away. It is reserved in heaven for 
you 

1 Pe 1 :5 who are being kept safe by God’s power through faith until the salvation which has been prepared is 
revealed at the final point of time. 

1 Pe 1 :6 This is a great joy to you, even though for a short time yet you must bear all sorts of trials; 

1 Pe 1:7 so that the worth of your faith, more valuable than gold, which is perishable even if it has been tested by 
fire, may be proved - to your praise and honour when Jesus Christ is revealed. 

1 Pe 1 :8 You have not seen him, yet you love him; and still without seeing him you believe in him and so are 
already filled with a joy so glorious that it cannot be described; 

1 Pe 1 :9 and you are sure of the goal of your faith, that is, the salvation of your souls. 

IPe 1:10 This salvation was the subject of the search and investigation of the prophets who spoke of the grace 
you were to receive, 

IPe 1:11 searching out the time and circumstances for which the Spirit of Christ, bearing witness in them, was 
revealing the sufferings of Christ and the glories to follow them. 

IPe 1:12 It was revealed to them that it was for your sake and not their own that they were acting as servants 
delivering the message which has now been announced to you by those who preached to you the gospel 
through the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Even the angels long to catch a glimpse of these things. 

IPe 1:13 Your minds, then, must be sober and ready for action; put all your hope in the grace brought to you by 
the revelation of Jesus Christ. 

IPe 1:14 Do not allow yourselves to be shaped by the passions of your old ignorance, 

IPe 1:15 but as obedient children, be yourselves holy in all your activity, after the model of the Holy One who 
calls us, 

IPe 1:16 since scripture says, “Be holy, for I am holy”. 

IPe 1:17 And if you address as Father him who judges without favouritism according to each individual’s deeds, 
live out the time of your exile here in reverent awe. 

IPe 1:18 For you know that the price of your ransom from the futile way of life handed down from your 
ancestors was paid, not in anything perishable like silver or gold, 

IPe 1:19 but in precious blood as of a blameless and spotless lamb, Christ. 

1 Pe 1 :20 He was marked out before the world was made, and was revealed at the final point of time for your 
sake. 

IPe 1:21 Through him you now have faith in God, who raised him from the dead and gave him glory for this 
very purpose — that your faith and hope should be in God. 

1 Pe 1 :22 Since by your obedience to the truth you have purified yourselves so that you can experience the 



genuine love of brothers, love each other intensely from the heart; 

1 Pe 1 :23 for your new birth was not from any perishable seed but from imperishable seed, the living and 
enduring Word of God. 

1 Pe 1 :24 For all humanity is grass, and all its beauty like the wild flower’s. As grass withers, the flower fades, 

1 Pe 1 :25 but the Word of the Lord remains for ever. And this Word is the Good News that has been brought to 
you. 

IPe 2:1 Rid yourselves, then, of all spite, deceit, hypocrisy, envy and carping criticism. 

IPe 2:2 Like new-born babies all your longing should be for milk — the unadulterated spiritual milk — which will 
help you to grow up to salvation, 

1 Pe 2:3 at any rate if you have tasted that the Lord is good . 

IPe 2:4 He is the living stone, rejected by human beings but chosen by God and precious to him; set yourselves 
close to him 

1 Pe 2:5 so that you, too, may be living stones making a spiritual house as a holy priesthood to offer the spiritual 
sacrifices made acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 

IPe 2:6 As scripture says: Now I am laying a stone in Zion, a chosen, precious cornerstone and no one who 
relies on this will be brought to disgrace. 

IPe 2:7 To you believers it brings honour. But for unbelievers, it is rather a stone which the builders rejected 
that became a cornerstone, 

1 Pe 2:8 a stumbling stone, a rock to trip people up. They stumble over it because they do not believe in the 
Word; it was the fate in store for them. 

IPe 2:9 But you are a chosen race, a kingdom of priests, a holy nation, a people to be a personal possession to 
sing the praises of God who called you out of the darkness into his wonderful light. 

IPe 2:10 Once you were a non-people and now you are the People of God; once you were outside his pity; now 
you have received pity. 

1 Pe 2:1 1 I urge you, my dear friends, as strangers and nomads, to keep yourselves free from the disordered 
natural inclinations that attack the soul. 

IPe 2:12 Always behave honourably among gentiles so that they can see for themselves what moral lives you 
lead, and when the day of reckoning comes, give thanks to God for the things which now make them denounce 
you as criminals. 

IPe 2:13 For the sake of the Lord, accept the authority of every human institution: the emperor, as the supreme 
authority, 

IPe 2:14 and the governors as commissioned by him to punish criminals and praise those who do good. 

IPe 2:15 It is God’s will that by your good deeds you should silence the ignorant talk of fools. 

IPe 2:16 You are slaves of no one except God, so behave like free people, and never use your freedom as a 
cover for wickedness. 

IPe 2:17 Have respect for everyone and love for your fellow-believers; fear God and honour the emperor. 

IPe 2:18 Slaves, you should obey your masters respectfully, not only those who are kind and reasonable but 
also those who are difficult to please. 

IPe 2:19 You see, there is merit if, in awareness of God, you put up with the pains of undeserved punishment; 

1 Pe 2:20 but what glory is there in putting up with a beating after you have done something wrong? The merit in 
the sight of God is in putting up with it patiently when you are punished for doing your duty. 

1 Pe 2:21 This, in fact, is what you were called to do, because Christ suffered for you and left an example for you 
to follow in his steps. 

IPe 2:22 He had done nothing wrong, and had spoken no deceit. 

IPe 2:23 He was insulted and did not retaliate with insults; when he was suffering he made no threats but put 
his trust in the upright judge. 

1 Pe 2:24 He was bearing our sins in his own body on the cross, so that we might die to our sins and live for 
uprightness; through his bruises you have been healed. 

IPe 2:25 You had gone astray like sheep but now you have returned to the shepherd and guardian of your 
souls. 

1 Pe 3:1 In the same way, you wives should be obedient to your husbands. Then if there are some husbands 
who do not believe the Word, they may find themselves won over, without a word spoken, by the way their wives 
behave, 

1 Pe 3:2 when they see the reverence and purity of your way of life. 

1 Pe 3:3 Your adornment should be not an exterior one, consisting of braided hair or gold jewellery or fine 
clothing, 

1 Pe 3:4 but the interior disposition of the heart, consisting in the imperishable quality of a gentle and peaceful 
spirit, so precious in the sight of God. 

1 Pe 3:5 That was how the holy women of the past dressed themselves attractively — they hoped in God and 



were submissive to their husbands; 

1 Pe 3:6 like Sarah, who was obedient to Abraham, and called him her lord. You are now her children, as long 
as you live good lives free from fear and worry. 

1 Pe 3:7 In the same way, husbands must always treat their wives with consideration in their life together, 
respecting a woman as one who, though she may be the weaker partner, is equally an heir to the generous gift 
of life. This will prevent anything from coming in the way of your prayers. 

IPe 3:8 Finally: you should all agree among yourselves and be sympathetic; love the brothers, have 
compassion and be self-effacing. 

IPe 3:9 Never repay one wrong with another, or one abusive word with another; instead, repay with a blessing. 
That is what you are called to do, so that you inherit a blessing. 

IPe 3:10 For Who among you delights in life, longs for time to enjoy prosperity? Guard your tongue from evil, 
your lips from any breath of deceit. 

IPe 3:1 1 Turn away from evil and do good, seek peace and pursue it. 

IPe 3:12 For the eyes of the Lord are on the upright, his ear turned to their cry. But the Lord’s face is set 
against those who do evil. 

IPe 3:13 No one can hurt you if you are determined to do only what is right; 

IPe 3:14 and blessed are you if you have to suffer for being upright. Have no dread of them; have no fear. 

IPe 3:15 Simply proclaim the Lord Christ holy in your hearts, and always have your answer ready for people 
who ask you the reason for the hope that you have. 

IPe 3:16 But give it with courtesy and respect and with a clear conscience, so that those who slander your good 
behaviour in Christ may be ashamed of their accusations. 

IPe 3:17 And if it is the will of God that you should suffer, it is better to suffer for doing right than for doing 
wrong. 

IPe 3:18 Christ himself died once and for all for sins, the upright for the sake of the guilty, to lead us to God. In 
the body he was put to death, in the spirit he was raised to life, 

IPe 3:19 and, in the spirit, he went to preach to the spirits in prison. 

IPe 3:20 They refused to believe long ago, while God patiently waited to receive them, in Noah’s time when the 
ark was being built. In it only a few, that is eight souls, were saved through water. 

1 Pe 3:21 It is the baptism corresponding to this water which saves you now — not the washing off of physical dirt 
but the pledge of a good conscience given to God through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 

IPe 3:22 who has entered heaven and is at God’s right hand, with angels, ruling forces and powers subject to 
him. 

1 Pe 4:1 As Christ has undergone bodily suffering, you too should arm yourselves with the same conviction, that 
anyone who has undergone bodily suffering has broken with sin, 

1 Pe 4:2 because for the rest of life on earth that person is ruled not by human passions but only by the will of 
God. 

1 Pe 4:3 You spent quite long enough in the past living the sort of life that gentiles choose to live, behaving in a 
debauched way, giving way to your passions, drinking to excess, having wild parties and drunken orgies and 
sacrilegiously worshipping false gods. 

1 Pe 4:4 So people are taken aback that you no longer hurry off with them to join this flood which is rushing 
down to ruin, and then abuse you for it. 

1 Pe 4:5 They will have to answer for it before the judge who is to judge the living and the dead. 

1 Pe 4:6 And this was why the gospel was brought to the dead as well, so that, though in their bodies they had 
undergone the judgement that faces all humanity, in their spirit they might enjoy the life of God. 

1 Pe 4:7 The end of all things is near, so keep your minds calm and sober for prayer. 

IPe 4:8 Above all preserve an intense love for each other, since love covers over many a sin. 

1 Pe 4:9 Welcome each other into your houses without grumbling. 

IPe 4:10 Each one of you has received a special grace, so, like good stewards responsible for all these varied 
graces of God, put it at the service of others. 

1 Pe 4:1 1 If anyone is a speaker, let it be as the words of God, if anyone serves, let it be as in strength granted 
by God; so that in everything God may receive the glory, through Jesus Christ, since to him alone belong all 
glory and power for ever and ever. Amen. 

IPe 4:12 My dear friends, do not be taken aback at the testing by fire which is taking place among you, as 
though something strange were happening to you; 

IPe 4:13 but in so far as you share in the sufferings of Christ, be glad, so that you may enjoy a much greater 
gladness when his glory is revealed. 

IPe 4:14 If you are insulted for bearing Christ’s name, blessed are you, for on you rests the Spirit of God, the 
Spirit of glory. 

IPe 4:15 None of you should ever deserve to suffer for being a murderer, a thief, a criminal or an informer; 



IPe 4:16 but if any one of you should suffer for being a Christian, then there must be no shame but thanksgiving 
to God for bearing this name. 

IPe 4:17 The time has come for the judgement to begin at the household of God; and if it begins with us, what 
will be the end for those who refuse to believe God’s gospel? 

IPe 4:18 If it is hard for the upright to be saved, what will happen to the wicked and to sinners? 

IPe 4:19 So even those whom God allows to suffer should commit themselves to a Creator who is trustworthy, 
and go on doing good. 

1 Pe 5:1 I urge the elders among you, as a fellow-elder myself and a witness to the sufferings of Christ, and as 
one who is to have a share in the glory that is to be revealed: 

1 Pe 5:2 give a shepherd’s care to the flock of God that is entrusted to you: watch over it, not simply as a duty 
but gladly, as God wants; not for sordid money, but because you are eager to do it. 

1 Pe 5:3 Do not lord it over the group which is in your charge, but be an example for the flock. 

1 Pe 5:4 When the chief shepherd appears, you will be given the unfading crown of glory. 

1 Pe 5:5 In the same way, younger people, be subject to the elders. Humility towards one another must be the 
garment you all wear constantly, because God opposes the proud but accords his favour to the humble. 

1 Pe 5:6 Bow down, then, before the power of God now, so that he may raise you up in due time; 

1 Pe 5:7 unload all your burden on to him, since he is concerned about you. 

IPe 5:8 Keep sober and alert, because your enemy the devil is on the prowl like a roaring lion, looking for 
someöne to devour. 

1 Pe 5:9 Stand up to him, strong in faith and in the knowledge that it is the same kind of suffering that the 
community of your brothers throughout the world is undergoing. 

IPe 5:10 You will have to suffer only for a little while: the God of all grace who called you to eternal glory in 
Christ will restore you, he will confirm, strengthen and support you. 

1 Pe 5:1 1 His power lasts for ever and ever. Amen. 

IPe 5:12 I write these few words to you through Silvanus, who is a trustworthy brother, to encourage you and 
attest that this is the true grace of God. Stand firm in it! 

IPe 5:13 Your sister in Babylon, who is with you among the chosen, sends you greetings; so does my son, 

Mark. 

IPe 5:14 Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace to you all who are in Christ. 

2Pe 1:1 Simon Peter, servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have received a faith as precious as our 
own, given through the saving justice of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

2Pe 1 :2 Grace and peace be yours in abundance through the knowledge of our Lord. 

2Pe 1 :3 By his divine power, he has lavished on us all the things we need for life and for true devotion, through 
the knowledge of him who has called us by his own glory and goodness. 

2Pe 1 :4 Through these, the greatest and priceless promises have been lavished on us, that through them you 
should share the divine nature and escape the corruption rife in the world through disordered passion. 

2Pe 1 :5 With this in view, do your utmost to support your faith with goodness, goodness with understanding, 

2Pe 1:6 understanding with self-control, self-control with perseverance, perseverance with devotion, 

2Pe 1:7 devotion with kindness to the brothers, and kindness to the brothers with love. 

2Pe 1 :8 The possession and growth of these qualities will prevent your knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ from 
being ineffectual or unproductive. 

2Pe 1 :9 But without them, a person is blind or short-sighted, forgetting how the sins of the past were washed 
away. 

2Pe 1:10 Instead of this, brothers, never allow your choice or calling to waver; then there will be no danger of 
your stumbling, 

2Pe 1:11 for in this way you will be given the generous gift of entry to the eternal kingdom of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ. 

2Pe 1:12 That is why I will always go on recalling the same truths to you, even though you already know them 
and are firmly fixed in these truths. 

2Pe 1:13 lam sure it is my duty, as long as I am in this tent, to keep stirring you up with reminders, 

2Pe 1:14 since I know the time for me to lay aside this tent is coming soon, as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear 
to me. 

2Pe 1:15 And I shall take great care that after my own departure you will still have a means to recall these 
things to mind. 

2Pe 1:16 When we told you about the power and the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, we were not slavishly 
repeating cleverly invented myths; no, we had seen his majesty with our own eyes. 

2Pe 1:17 He was honoured and glorified by God the Father, when a voice came to him from the transcendent 
Glory, This is my Son, the Beloved; he enjoys my favour. 

2Pe 1:18 We ourselves heard this voice from heaven, when we were with him on the holy mountain. 



2Pe 1:19 So we have confirmation of the words of the prophets; and you will be right to pay attention to it as to a 
lamp for lighting a way through the dark, until the dawn comes and the morning star rises in your minds. 

2Pe 1 :20 At the same time, we must recognise that the interpretation of scriptural prophecy is never a matter for 
the individual. 

2Pe 1 :21 For no prophecy ever came from human initiative. When people spoke for God it was the Holy Spirit 
that moved them. 

2Pe 2:1 As there were false prophets in the past history of our people, so you too will have your false teachers, 
who will insinuate their own disruptive views and, by disowning the Lord who bought them freedom, will bring 
upon themselves speedy destruction. 

2Pe 2:2 Many will copy their debauched behaviour, and the Way of T ruth will be brought into disrepute on their 
account. 

2Pe 2:3 In their greed they will try to make a profit out of you with untrue tales. But the judgement made upon 
them long ago is not idle, and the destruction awaiting them is for ever on the watch. 

2Pe 2:4 When angels sinned, God did not spare them: he sent them down into the underworld and consigned 
them to the dark abyss to be held there until the Judgement. 

2Pe 2:5 He did not spare the world in ancient times: he saved only Noah, the preacher of uprightness, along 
with seven others, when he sent the Flood over a world of sinners. 

2Pe 2:6 He condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah by reducing them to ashes as a warning to future 
sinners; 

2Pe 2:7 but rescued Lot, an upright man who had been sickened by the debauched way in which these vile 
people behaved- 

2Pe 2:8 for that upright man, living among them, was outraged in his upright soul by the crimes that he saw and 
heard every day. 

2Pe 2:9 All this shows that the Lord is well able to rescue the good from their trials, and hold the wicked for their 
punishment until the Day of Judgement, 

2Pe 2:10 especially those who follow the desires of their corrupt human nature and have no respect for the 
Lord’s authority. Such self-willed people with no reverence are not afraid of offending against the glorious ones, 
2Pe 2:1 1 but the angels in their greater strength and power make no complaint or accusation against them in 
the Lord’s presence. 

2Pe 2:12 But these people speak evil of what they do not understand; they are like brute beasts, born only to be 
caught and killed, and like beasts they will be destroyed, being injured in return for the injuries they have 
inflicted. 

2Pe 2:13 Debauchery even by day they make their pleasure; they are unsightly blots, and amuse themselves by 
their trickery even when they are sharing your table; 

2Pe 2:14 with their eyes always looking for adultery, people with an insatiable capacity for sinning, they will 
seduce any but the most stable soul. Where greed is concerned they are at their peak of fitness. They are under 
a curse. 

2Pe 2:15 They have left the right path and wandered off to follow the path of Balaam son of Bosor, who set his 
heart on a dishonest reward, but soon had his fault pointed out to him: 

2Pe 2:16 a dumb beast of burden, speaking with a human voice, put a stop to the madness of the prophet. 

2Pe 2:17 People like this are dried-up springs, fogs swirling in the wind, and the gloom of darkness is stored up 
for them. 

2Pe 2:18 With their high-sounding but empty talk they tempt back people who have scarcely escaped from 
those who live in error, by playing on the disordered desires of their human nature and by debaucheries. 

2Pe 2:19 They may promise freedom but are themselves slaves to corruption; because if anyone lets himself be 
dominated by anything, then he is a slave to it; 

2Pe 2:20 and anyone who has escaped the pollution of the world by coming to know our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, and who then allows himself to be entangled and mastered by it a second time, ends up by being 
worse than he was before. 

2Pe 2:21 It would have been better for them never to have learnt the way of uprightness, than to learn it and 
then desert the holy commandment that was entrusted to them. 

2Pe 2:22 What they have done is exactly as the proverb rightly says: The dog goes back to its vomit and: As 
soon as the sow has been washed, it wallows in the mud. 

2Pe 3:1 My dear friends, this is the second letter I have written to you, trying to awaken in you by my reminders 
an unclouded understanding. 

2Pe 3:2 Remember what was said in the past by the holy prophets and the command of the Lord and Saviour 
given by your apostles. 

2Pe 3:3 First of all, do not forget that in the final days there will come sarcastic scoffers whose life is ruled by 
their passions. 



2Pe 3:4 “What has happened to the promise of his coming?”. they will say, “Since our Fathers died everything 
has gone on just as it has since the beginning of creation!”. 

2Pe 3:5 They deliberately ignore the fact that long ago there were the heavens and the earth, formed out of 
water and through water by the Word of God, 

2Pe 3:6 and that it was through these same factors that the world of those days was destroyed by the 
floodwaters. 

2Pe 3:7 It is the same Word which is reserving the present heavens and earth for fire, keeping them till the Day 
of Judgement and of the destruction of sinners. 

2Pe 3:8 But there is one thing, my dear friends, that you must never forget: that with the Lord, a day is like a 
thousand years, and a thousand years are like a day. 

2Pe 3:9 The Lord is not being slow in carrying out his promises, as some people think he is; rather is he being 
patient with you, wanting nobody to be lost and everybody to be brought to repentance. 

2Pe 3:10 The Day of the Lord will come like a thief, and then with a roar the sky will vanish, the elements will 
catch fire and melt away, the earth and all that it contains will be burned up. 

2Pe 3:1 1 Since everything is coming to an end like this, what holy and saintly lives you should be living 
2Pe 3:12 while you wait for the Day of God to come, and try to hasten its coming: on that Day the sky will 
dissolve in flames and the elements melt in the heat. 

2Pe 3:13 What we are waiting for, relying on his promises, is the new heavens and new earth, where 
uprightness will be at home. 

2Pe 3:14 So then, my dear friends, while you are waiting, do your best to live blameless and unsullied lives so 
that he will find you at peace. 

2Pe 3:15 Think of our Lord’s patience as your opportunity to be saved; our brother Paul, who is so dear to us, 
told you this when he wrote to you with the wisdom that he was given. 

2Pe 3:16 He makes this point too in his letters as a whole wherever he touches on these things. In all his letters 
there are of course some passages which are hard to understand, and these are the ones that uneducated and 
unbalanced people distort, in the same way as they distort the rest of scripture -to their own destruction. 

2Pe 3:17 Since you have been forewarned about this, my dear friends, be careful that you do not come to the 
point of losing the firm ground that you are standing on, carried away by the errors of unprincipled people. 

2Pe 3:18 Instead, continue to grow in the grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To 
him be glory, in time and eternity. Amen. 

Uo 1:1 Something which has existed since the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our 
own eyes, which we have watched and touched with our own hands, the Word of life — this is our theme. 

1 Jo 1:2 That life was made visible; we saw it and are giving our testimony, declaring to you the eternal life, 
which was present to the Father and has been revealed to us. 

1 Jo 1:3 We are declaring to you what we have seen and heard, so that you too may share our life. Our life is 
shared with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. 

1 Jo 1:4 We are writing this to you so that our joy may be complete. 

IJo 1:5 This is what we have heard from him and are declaring to you: God is light, and there is no darkness in 
him at all. 

IJo 1:6 If we say that we share in God’s life while we are living in darkness, we are lying, because we are not 
living the truth. 

IJo 1:7 But if we live in light, as he is in light, we have a share in another’s life, and the blood of Jesus, his Son, 
cleanses us from all sin. 

IJo 1:8 If we say, “We have no sin”, we are deceiving ourselves, and truth has no place in us; 

1 Jo 1 :9 if we acknowledge our sins, he is trustworthy and upright, so that he will forgive our sins and will 

cleanse us from all evil. 

IJo 1:10 If we say, “We have never sinned”, we make him a liar, and his word has no place in us. 

IJo 2:1 My children, I am writing this to prevent you from sinning; but if anyone does sin, we have an advocate 
with the Father, Jesus Christ, the upright. 

IJo 2:2 He is the sacrifice to expiate our sins, and not only ours, but also those of the whole world. 

IJo 2:3 In this way we know that we have come to know him, if we keep his commandments. 

IJo 2:4 Whoëver says, “I know him” without keeping his commandments, is a liar, and truth has no place in him. 

IJo 2:5 But anyone who does keep his word, in such a one God’s love truly reaches its perfection. This is the 

proof that we are in God. 

IJo 2:6 Whoëver claims to remain in him must act as he acted. 

IJo 2:7 My dear friends, this is not a new commandment I am writing for you, but an old commandment that you 
have had from the beginning; the old commandment is the message you have heard. 

IJo 2:8 Yet in another way, I am writing a new commandment for you — and this is true for you, just as much as 
for him - for darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining. 



1 Jo 2:9 Whoëver claims to be in light but hates his brother is still in darkness. 

1 Jo 2:10 Anyone who loves his brother remains in light and there is in him nothing to make him fall away. 

1 Jo 2: 1 1 But whoëver hates his brother is in darkness and is walking about in darkness not knowing where he is 
going, because darkness has blinded him. 

1 Jo 2:12 lam writing to you, children, because your sins have been forgiven through his name. 

1 Jo 2:13 lam writing to you, fathers, because you have come to know the One who has existed since the 
beginning. I am writing to you, young people, because you have overcome the Evil One. 

1 Jo 2:14 I have written to you, children, because you have come to know the Father. I have written to you, 
parents, because you have come to know the One who has existed since the beginning. I have written to you, 
young people, because you are strong, and God’s word remains in you, and you have overcome the Evil One. 

1 Jo 2:15 Do not love the world or what is in the world. If anyone does love the world, the love of the Father finds 
no place in him, 

1 Jo 2:16 because everything there is in the world — disordered bodily desires, disordered desires of the eyes, 
pride in possession — is not from the Father but is from the world. 

1 Jo 2:17 And the world, with all its disordered desires, is passing away. But whoëver does the will of God 
remains for ever. 

1 Jo 2:18 Children, this is the final hour; you have heard that the Antichrist is coming, and now many Antichrists 
have already come; from this we know that it is the final hour. 

1 Jo 2: 1 9 They have gone from among us, but they never really belonged to us; if they had belonged to us, they 
would have stayed with us. But this was to prove that not one of them belonged to us. 

1 Jo 2:20 But you have been anointed by the Holy One, and have all received knowledge. 

Uo 2:21 I have written to you not because you are ignorant of the truth, but because you are well aware of it, 
and because no lie can come from the truth. 

1 Jo 2:22 Who is the liar, if not one who claims that Jesus is not the Christ? This is the Antichrist, who denies 
both the Father and the Son. 

1 Jo 2:23 Whoëver denies the Son cannot have the Father either; whoëver acknowledges the Son has the 
Father too. 

1 Jo 2:24 Let what you heard in the beginning remain in you; as long as what you heard in the beginning 
remains in you, you will remain in the Son and in the Father. 

1 Jo 2:25 And the promise he made you himself is eternal life. 

1 Jo 2:26 So much have I written to you about those who are trying to lead you astray. 

1 Jo 2:27 But as for you, the anointing you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to 
teach you; since the anointing he gave you teaches you everything, and since it is true, not false, remain in him 
just as he has taught you. 

1 Jo 2:28 Therefore remain in him now, children, so that when he appears we may be fearless, and not shrink 
from him in shame at his coming. 

1 Jo 2:29 If you know that he is upright you must recognise that everyone whose life is upright is a child of his. 

1 Jo 3:1 You must see what great love the Father has lavished on us by letting us be called God’s children — 
which is what we are! The reason why the world does not acknowledge us is that it did not acknowledge him. 

1 Jo 3:2 My dear friends, we are already God’s children, but what we shall be in the future has not yet been 
revealed. We are well aware that when he appears we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he really 
is. 

1 Jo 3:3 Whoëver treasures this hope of him purifies himself, to be as pure as he is. 

1 Jo 3:4 Whoëver sins, acts wickedly, because all sin is wickedness. 

1 Jo 3:5 Now you are well aware that he has appeared in order to take sins away, and that in him there is no sin. 
1 Jo 3:6 No one who remains in him sins, and whoëver sins has neither seen him nor recognised him. 

1 Jo 3:7 Children, do not let anyone lead you astray. Whoëver acts uprightly is upright, just as he is upright. 

1 Jo 3:8 Whoëver lives sinfully belongs to the devil, since the devil has been a sinner from the beginning. This 
was the purpose of the appearing of the Son of God, to undo the work of the devil. 

1 Jo 3:9 No one who is a child of God sins because God’s seed remains in him. Nor can he sin, because he is a 
child of God. 

IJo 3:10 This is what distinguishes the children of God from the children of the devil: whoëver does not live 
uprightly and does not love his brother is not from God. 

IJo 3:11 This is the message which you heard from the beginning, that we must love one another, 

IJo 3:12 not to be like Cain, who was from the Evil One and murdered his brother. And why did he murder his 
brother? Because his own actions were evil and his brother’s upright. 

IJo 3:13 Do not be surprised, brothers, if the world hates you. 

IJo 3:14 We are well aware that we have passed over from death to life because we love our brothers. 

Whoëver does not love, remains in death. 



1 Jo 3:15 Anyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you are well aware that no murderer has eternal life 
remaining in him. 

1 Jo 3:16 This is the proof of love, that he laid down his life for us, and we too ought to lay down our lives for our 
brothers. 

1 Jo 3:17 If anyone is well-off in worldly possessions and sees his brother in need but closes his heart to him, 
how can the love of God be remaining in him? 

1 Jo 3:18 Children, our love must be not just words or mere talk, but something active and genuine. 

1 Jo 3:19 This will be the proof that we belong to the truth, and it will convince us in his presence, 

1 Jo 3:20 even if our own feelings condemn us, that God is greater than our feelings and knows all things. 

1 Jo 3:21 My dear friends, if our own feelings do not condemn us, we can be fearless before God, 

1 Jo 3:22 and whatever we ask we shall receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do what is 
acceptable to him. 

1 Jo 3:23 His commandment is this, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and that we 
should love one another as he commanded us. 

Uo 3:24 Whoëver keeps his commandments remains in God, and God in him. And this is the proof that he 
remains in us: the Spirit that he has given us. 

1 Jo 4:1 My dear friends, not every spirit is to be trusted, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, 
for many false prophets are at large in the world. 

1 Jo 4:2 This is the proof of the spirit of God: any spirit which acknowledges Jesus Christ, come in human 
nature, is from God, 

IJo 4:3 and no spirit which fails to acknowledge Jesus is from God; it is the spirit of Antichrist, whose coming 
you have heard of; he is already at large in the world. 

IJo 4:4 Children, you are from God and have overcome them, because he who is in you is greater than he who 
is in the world. 

IJo 4:5 They are from the world, and therefore the world inspires what they say, and listens to them. 

IJo 4:6 We are from God; whoëver recognises God listens to us; anyone who is not from God refuses to listen 
to us. This is how we can distinguish the spirit of truth from the spirit of falsehood. 

IJo 4:7 My dear friends, let us love one another, since love is from God and everyone who loves is a child of 
God and knows God. 

IJo 4:8 Whoëver fails to love does not know God, because God is love. 

IJo 4:9 This is the revelation of God’s love for us, that God sent his only Son into the world that we might have 
life through him. 

IJo 4:10 Love consists in this: it is not we who loved God, but God loved us and sent his Son to expiate our 
sins. 

IJo 4:11 My dear friends, if God loved us so much, we too should love one another. 

IJo 4:12 No one has ever seen God, but as long as we love one another God remains in us and his love comes 
to its perfection in us. 

1 Jo 4: 1 3 This is the proof that we remain in him and he in us, that he has given us a share in his Spirit. 

IJo 4:14 We ourselves have seen and testify that the Father sent his Son as Saviour of the world. 

IJo 4:15 Anyone who acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God, God remains in him and he in God. 

IJo 4:16 We have recognised for ourselves, and put our faith in, the love God has for us. God is love, and 
whoëver remains in love remains in God and God in him. 

IJo 4:17 Love comes to its perfection in us when we can face the Day of Judgement fearlessly, because even 
in this world we have become as he is. 

IJo 4:18 In love there is no room for fear, but perfect love drives out fear, because fear implies punishment and 
no one who is afraid has come to perfection in love. 

IJo 4:19 Let us love, then, because he first loved us. 

IJo 4:20 Anyone who says “I love God” and hates his brother, is a liar, since whoëver does not love the brother 
whom he can see cannot love God whom he has not seen. 

IJo 4:21 Indeed this is the commandment we have received from him, that whoëver loves God, must also love 
his brother. 

IJo 5:1 Whoëver believes that Jesus is the Christ is a child of God, and whoëver loves the father loves the son. 
IJo 5:2 In this way we know that we love God’s children, when we love God and keep his commandments. 

IJo 5:3 This is what the love of God is: keeping his commandments. Nor are his commandments burdensome, 
IJo 5:4 because every child of God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that has overcome the world — 
our faith. 

IJo 5:5 Who can overcome the world but the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 

IJo 5:6 He it is who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not with water alone but with water and blood, and 
it is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is Truth. 



1 Jo 5:7 So there are three witnesses, 

Uo 5:8 the Spirit, water and blood; and the three of them coincide. 

1 Jo 5:9 If we accept the testimony of human witnesses, God’s testimony is greater, for this is God’s testimony 
which he gave about his Son. 

1 Jo 5:10 Whoëver believes in the Son of God has this testimony within him, and whoëver does not believe is 
making God a liar, because he has not believed the testimony God has given about his Son. 

1 Jo 5:11 This is the testimony: God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. 

1 Jo 5:12 Whoëver has the Son has life, and whoëver has not the Son of God has not life. 

1 Jo 5:13 I have written this to you who believe in the name of the Son of God so that you may know that you 
have eternal life. 

1 Jo 5:14 Our fearlessness towards him consists in this, that if we ask anything in accordance with his will he 
hears us. 

1 Jo 5: 1 5 And if we know that he listens to whatever we ask him, we know that we already possess whatever we 
have asked of him. 

1 Jo 5:16 If anyone sees his brother commit a sin that is not a deadly sin, he has only to pray, and God will give 
life to this brother - provided that it is not a deadly sin. There is sin that leads to death and I am not saying you 
must pray about that. 

1 Jo 5:17 Every kind of wickedness is sin, but not all sin leads to death. 

1 Jo 5:18 We are well aware that no one who is a child of God sins, because he who was born from God 
protects him, and the Evil One has no hold over him. 

1 Jo 5:19 We are well aware that we are from God, and the whole world is in the power of the Evil One. 

1 Jo 5:20 We are well aware also that the Son of God has come, and has given us understanding so that we 
may know the One who is true. We are in the One who is true as we are in his Son, Jesus Christ. He is the true 
God and this is eternal life. Children, be on your guard against false gods. 

2Jo 1:1 From the Elder: my greetings to the Lady, the chosen one, and to her children, whom I love in truth — 
and I am not the only one, for so do all who have come to know the Truth - and I am not the only one, for so so 
do all who have come to know the Truth- 

2Jo 1 :2 because of the truth that remains in us and will be with us for ever. 

2Jo 1 :3 In our life of truth and love, we shall have grace, faithful love and peace from God the Father and from 
Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father. 

2Jo 1 :4 It has given me great joy to find that children of yours have been living the life of truth as we were 
commanded by the Father. 

2Jo 1 :5 And now I am asking you — dear lady, not as though I were writing you a new commandment, but only 
the one which we have had from the beginning - that we should love one another. 

2Jo 1 :6 To love is to live according to his commandments: this is the commandment which you have heard 
since the beginning, to live a life of love. 

2Jo 1:7 There are many deceivers at large in the world, refusing to acknowledge Jesus Christ as coming in 
human nature. They are the Deceiver; they are the Antichrist. 

2Jo 1 :8 Watch yourselves, or all our work will be lost and you will forfeit your full reward. 

2Jo 1 :9 If anybody does not remain in the teaching of Christ but goes beyond it, he does not have God with him: 
only those who remain in what he taught can have the Father and the Son with them. 

2Jo 1:10 If anyone comes to you bringing a different doctrine, you must not receive him into your house or even 
give him a greeting. 

2Jo 1:11 Whoëver greets him has a share in his wicked activities. 

2Jo 1:12 There are several things I have to tell you, but I have thought it best not to trust them to paper and ink. 

I hope instead to visit you and talk to you in person, so that our joy may be complete. 

2Jo 1:13 Greetings to you from the children of your sister, the chosen one. 

3Jo 1:1 From the Elder: greetings to my dear friend Gaius, whom I love in truth. 

3Jo 1 :2 My dear friend, I hope everything is going happily with you and that you are as well physically as you 
are spiritually. 

3Jo 1 :3 It was a great joy to me when some brothers came and told of your faithfulness to the truth, and of your 
life in the truth. 

3Jo 1 :4 It is always my greatest joy to hear that my children are living according to the truth. 

3Jo 1 :5 My dear friend, you have done loyal work in helping these brothers, even though they were strangers to 
you. 

3Jo 1 :6 They are a proof to the whole Church of your love and it would be a kindness if you could help them on 
their journey as God would approve. 

3Jo 1 :7 It was entirely for the sake of the name that they set out, without depending on the non-believers for 
anything: 



3Jo 1 :8 it is our duty to welcome people of this sort and contribute our share to their work for the truth. 

3Jo 1 :9 I have written a note for the members of the church, but Diotrephes, who enjoys being in charge of it, 
refuses to accept us. 

3Jo 1:10 So if I come, I shall tell everyone how he has behaved, and about the wicked accusations he has been 
circulating against us. As if that were not enough, he not only refuses to welcome our brothers, but prevents from 
doing so other people who would have liked to, and expels them from the church. 

3Jo 1:11 My dear friend, never follow a bad example, but keep following the good one; whoëver does what is 
right is from God, but no one who does what is wrong has ever seen God. 

3Jo 1:12 Demetrius has been approved by everyone, and indeed by Truth itself. We too will vouch for him and 
you know that our testimony is true. 

3Jo 1:13 There were several things I had to tell you but I would rather not trust them to pen and ink. 

3Jo 1:14 However, I hope to see you soon and talk to you in person. 

3Jo 1:15 Peace be with you; greetings from your friends; greet each of our friends by name. 

Jud 1:1 From Jude, servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James; to those who are called, to those who are 
dear to God the Father and kept safe for Jesus Christ, 

Jud 1 :2 mercy, peace and love be yours in abundance. 

Jud 1 :3 My dear friends, at a time when I was eagerly looking forward to writing to you about the salvation that 
we all share, I felt that I must write to you encouraging you to fight hard for the faith which has been once and for 
all entrusted to God’s holy people. 

Jud 1 :4 Certain people have infiltrated among you, who were long ago marked down for condemnation on this 
account; without any reverence they pervert the grace of our God to debauchery and deny all religion, rejecting 
our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ. 

Jud 1 :5 I should like to remind you - though you have already learnt it once and for all — that the Lord rescued 
the nation from Egypt, but afterwards he still destroyed the people who refused to believe him; 

Jud 1 :6 and the angels who did not keep to the authority they had, but left their appointed sphere, he has kept in 
darkness in eternal bonds until the judgement of the great Day. 

Jud 1:7 Sodom and Gomorrah, too, and the neighbouring towns, who with the same sexual immorality pursued 
unnatural lusts, are put before us as an example since they are paying the penalty of eternal fire. 

Jud 1 :8 Nevertheless, these people are doing the same: in their delusions they not only defile their bodies and 
disregard Authority, but abuse the Glories as well. 

Jud 1 :9 Not even the archangel Michael, when he was engaged in argument with the devil about the corpse of 
Moses, dared to denounce him in the language of abuse; all he said was, “May the Lord rebuke you”. 

Jud 1:10 But these people abuse anything they do not understand; and the only things they do understand — 
merely by nature like unreasoning animals — will turn out to be fatal to them. 

Jud 1:11 Alas for them, because they have followed Cain; they have thrown themselves into the same delusion 
as Balaam for a reward; they have been ruined by the same rebellion as Korah -and share the same fate. 

Jud 1:12 They are a dangerous hazard at your community meals, coming for the food and quite shamelessly 
only looking after themselves. They are like the clouds blown about by the winds and bringing no rain, or like 
autumn trees, barren and uprooted and so twice dead; 

Jud 1:13 like wild sea waves with their own shame for foam; or like wandering stars for whom the gloom of 
darkness is stored up for ever. 

Jud 1:14 It was with them in mind that Enoch, the seventh patriarch from Adam, made his prophecy when he 
said, “I tell you, the Lord will come with his holy ones in their tens of thousands, 

Jud 1:15 to pronounce judgement on all humanity and to sentence the godless for all the godless things they 
have done, and for all the defiant things said against him by godless sinners”. 

Jud 1:16 They are mischief-makers, grumblers governed only by their own desires, with mouths full of boastful 
talk, ready to flatter others for gain. 

Jud 1:17 But remember, my dear friends, what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ foretold. 

Jud 1:18 “At the final point of time”, they told you, “there will be mockers who follow nothing but their own godless 
desires”. 

Jud 1:19 It is they who cause division, who live according to nature and do not possess the Spirit. 

Jud 1 :20 But you, my dear friends, must build yourselves up on the foundation of your most holy faith, praying in 
the Holy Spirit; 

Jud 1 :21 keep yourselves within the love of God and wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to give you 
eternal life. 

Jud 1 :22 To some you must be compassionate because they are wavering; 

Jud 1 :23 others you must save by snatching them from the fire; to others again you must be compassionate but 
wary, hating even the tunic stained by their bodies. 

Jud 1 :24 To him who can keep you from falling and bring you safe to his glorious presence, innocent and joyful, 



Jud 1 :25 to the only God, our Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, authority and power, 
before all ages, now and for ever. Amen. 

Rev 1:1 A revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him so that he could tell his servants what is now to take 
place very soon; he sent his angel to make it known to his servant John, 

Rev 1 :2 and John has borne witness to the Word of God and to the witness of Jesus Christ, everything that he 
saw. 

Rev 1 :3 Blessed is anyone who reads the words of this prophecy, and blessed those who hear them, if they 
treasure the content, because the Time is near. 

Rev 1 :4 John, to the seven churches of Asia: grace and peace to you from him who is, who was, and who is to 
come, from the seven spirits who are before his throne, 

Rev 1 :5 and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the First-born from the dead, the highest of earthly kings. He 
loves us and has washed away our sins with his blood, 

Rev 1 :6 and made us a Kingdom of Priests to serve his God and Father; to him, then, be glory and power for 
ever and ever. Amen. 

Rev 1:7 Look, he is coming on the clouds; everyone will see him, even those who pierced him, and all the races 
of the earth will mourn over him. Indeed this shall be so. Amen. 

Rev 1 :8 “I am the Alpha and the Omega”, says the Lord God, who is, who was, and who is to come, the 
Almighty. 

Rev 1 :9 I, John, your brother and partner in hardships, in the kingdom and in perseverance in Jesus, was on the 
island of Patmos on account of the Word of God and of witness to Jesus; 

Rev 1:10 it was the Lord’s Day and I was in ecstasy, and I heard a loud voice behind me, like the sound of a 
trumpet, saying, 

Rev 1:11 “Write down in a book all that you see, and send it to the seven churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, 
Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea”. 

Rev 1:12 I turned round to see who was speaking to me, and when I turned I saw seven golden lamp-stands 
Rev 1:13 and, in the middle of them, one like a Son of man, dressed in a long robe tied at the waist with a belt of 
gold. 

Rev 1:14 His head and his hair were white with the whiteness of wool, like snow, his eyes like a burning flame, 
Rev 1:15 his feet like burnished bronze when it has been refined in a furnace, and his voice like the sound of the 
ocean. 

Rev 1:16 In his right hand he was holding seven stars, out of his mouth came a sharp sword, double-edged, and 
his face was like the sun shining with all its force. 

Rev 1:17 When I saw him, I fell at his feet as though dead, but he laid his right hand on me and said, “Do not be 
afraid; it is I, the First and the Last; I am the Living One, 

Rev 1:18 I was dead and look — I am alive for ever and ever, and I hold the keys of death and of Hades. 

Rev 1:19 Now write down all that you see of present happenings and what is still to come. 

Rev 1 :20 The secret of the seven stars you have seen in my right hand, and of the seven golden lamp-stands, is 
this: the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lamp-stands are the seven churches 
themselves”. 

Rev 2:1 “Write to the angel of the church in Ephesus and say, ‘Here is the message of the one who holds the 
seven stars in his right hand and who lives among the seven golden lamp-stands: 

Rev 2:2 I know your activities, your hard work and your perseverance. I know you cannot stand wicked people, 
and how you put to the test those who were self-styled apostles, and found them false. 

Rev 2:3 I know too that you have perseverance, and have suffered for my name without growing tired. 

Rev 2:4 Nevertheless, I have this complaint to make: you have less love now than formerly. 

Rev 2:5 Think where you were before you fell; repent, and behave as you did at first, or else, if you will not 
repent, I shall come to you and take your lamp-stand from its place. 

Rev 2:6 It is in your favour, nevertheless, that you loathe as I do the way the Nicolaitans are behaving. 

Rev 2:7 Let anyone who can hear, listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches: those who prove victorious 
I will feed from the tree of life set in God’s paradise’. 

Rev 2:8 “Write to the angel of the church in Smyrna and say, ‘Here is the message of the First and the Last, 
who was dead and has come to life again: 

Rev 2:9 I know your hardships and your poverty, and — though you are rich — the slander of the people who 
falsely claim to be Jews but are really members of the synagogue of Satan. 

Rev 2:10 Do not be afraid of the sufferings that are coming to you. Look, the devil will send some of you to 
prison to put you to the test, and you must face hardship for ten days. Even if you have to die, keep faithful, and I 
will give you the crown of life for your prize. 

Rev 2:1 1 Let anyone who can hear, listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches: for those who prove 
victorious will come to no harm from the second death’. 



Rev 2:12 “Write to the angel of the church in Pergamum and say, ‘Here is the message of the one who has the 
sharp sword, double-edged: 

Rev 2:13 I know where you live, in the place where Satan is enthroned, and that you still hold firmly to my name, 
and did not disown your faith in me even when my faithful witness, Antipas, was killed among you, where Satan 
lives. 

Rev 2:14 ‘Nevertheless, I have one or two charges against you: some of you are followers of Balaam, who 
taught Balak to set a trap for the Israelites so that they committed adultery by eating food that had been 
sacrificed to idols; 

Rev 2:15 and among you too there are some also who follow the teaching of the Nicolaitans. 

Rev 2:16 So repent, or I shall soon come to you and attack these people with the sword out of my mouth. 

Rev 2:17 Let anyone who can hear, listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches: to those who prove 
victorious I will give some hidden manna and a white stone, with a new name written on it, known only to the 
person who receives it’. 

Rev 2:18 “Write to the angel of the church in Thyatira and say, ‘Here is the message of the Son of God who has 
eyes like a burning flame and feet like burnished bronze: 

Rev 2:19 I know your activities, your love, your faith, your service and your perseverance, and I know how you 
are still making progress. 

Rev 2:20 Nevertheless, I have a complaint to make: you tolerate the woman Jezebel who claims to be a 
prophetess, and by her teaching she is luring my servants away to commit the adultery of eating food which has 
been sacrificed to idols. 

Rev 2:21 I have given her time to repent but she is not willing to repent of her adulterous life. 

Rev 2:22 Look, I am consigning her to a bed of pain, and all her partners in adultery to great hardship, unless 
they repent of their practices; 

Rev 2:23 and I will see that her children die, so that all the churches realise that it is I who test motives and 
thoughts and repay you as your deeds deserve. 

Rev 2:24 But on the rest of you in Thyatira, all of you who have not accepted this teaching or learnt the deep 
secrets of Satan, as they are called, I am not laying any other burden; 

Rev 2:25 but hold on firmly to what you already have until I come. 

Rev 2:26 To anyone who proves victorious, and keeps working for me until the end, I will give the authority over 
the nations 

Rev 2:27 which I myself have been given by my Father, to rule them with an iron sceptre and shatter them like 
so many pots. 

Rev 2:28 And I will give such a person the Morning Star. 

Rev 2:29 Let anyone who can hear, listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches’. 

Rev 3:1 “Write to the angel of the church in Sardis and say, ‘Here is the message of the one who holds the 
seven spirits of God and the seven stars: I know about your behaviour: how you are reputed to be alive and yet 
are dead. 

Rev 3:2 Wake up; put some resolve into what little vigour you have left: it is dying fast. So far I have failed to 
notice anything in your behaviour that my God could possibly call perfect; 

Rev 3:3 remember how you first heard the message. Hold on to that. Repent! If you do not wake up, I shall 
come to you like a thief, and you will have no idea at what hour I shall come upon you. 

Rev 3:4 There are a few in Sardis, it is true, who have kept their robes unstained, and they are fit to come with 
me, dressed in white. 

Rev 3:5 Anyone who proves victorious will be dressed, like these, in white robes; I shall not blot that name out 
of the book of life, but acknowledge it in the presence of my Father and his angels. 

Rev 3:6 Let anyone who can hear, listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches’. 

Rev 3:7 “Write to the angel of the church in Philadelphia and say, ‘Here is the message of the holy and true one 
who has the key of David, so that when he opens, no one will close, and when he closes, no one will open: 

Rev 3:8 I know about your activities. Look, I have opened in front of you a door that no one will be able to close 
— and I know that though you are not very strong, you have kept my commandments and not disowned my 
name. 

Rev 3:9 Look, I am going to make the synagogue of Satan — those who falsely claim to be Jews, but are liars, 
because they are no such thing — 1 will make them come and fall at your feet and recognize that I have loved 
you. 

Rev 3:10 Because you have kept my commandment to persevere, I will keep you safe in the time of trial which 
is coming for the whole world, to put the people of the world to the test. 

Rev 3:1 1 I am coming soon: hold firmly to what you already have, and let no one take your victor’s crown away 
from you. 

Rev 3:12 Anyone who proves victorious I will make into a pillar in the sanctuary of my God, and it will stay there 



for ever; I will inscribe on it the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem which is 
coming down from my God in heaven, and my own new name as well. 

Rev 3:13 Let anyone who can hear, listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches’. 

Rev 3:14 “Write to the angel of the church in Laodicea and say, ‘Here is the message of the Amen, the 
trustworthy, the true witness, the Principle of God’s creation: 

Rev 3:15 I know about your activities: how you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were one or the other, 

Rev 3:16 but since you are neither hot nor cold, but only lukewarm, I will spit you out of my mouth. 

Rev 3:17 You say to yourself: I am rich, I have made a fortune and have everything I want, never realising that 
you are wretchedly and pitiably poor, and blind and naked too. 

Rev 3:18 I warn you, buy from me the gold that has been tested in the fire to make you truly rich, and white 
robes to clothe you and hide your shameful nakedness, and ointment to put on your eyes to enable you to see. 
Rev 3:19 I reprove and train those whom I love: so repent in real earnest. 

Rev 3:20 Look, I am standing at the door, knocking. If one of you hears me calling and opens the door, I will 
come in to share a meal at that person’s side. 

Rev 3:21 Anyone who proves victorious I will allow to share my throne, just as I have myself overcome and 
have taken my seat with my Father on his throne. 

Rev 3:22 Let anyone who can hear, listen to what the Spirit is saying to the churches’”. 

Rev 4:1 Then, in my vision, I saw a door open in heaven and heard the same voice speaking to me, the voice 
like a trumpet, saying, “Come up here: I will show you what is to take place in the future”. 

Rev 4:2 With that, I fell into ecstasy and I saw a throne standing in heaven, and the One who was sitting on the 
throne, 

Rev 4:3 and the One sitting there looked like a diamond and a ruby. There was a rainbow encircling the throne, 
and this looked like an emerald. 

Rev 4:4 Round the throne in a circle were twenty-four thrones, and on them twenty-four elders sitting, dressed 
in white robes with golden crowns on their heads. 

Rev 4:5 Flashes of lightning were coming from the throne, and the sound of peals of thunder, and in front of the 
throne there were seven flaming lamps burning, the seven Spirits of God. 

Rev 4:6 In front of the throne was a sea as transparent as crystal. In the middle of the throne and around it, 
were four living creatures all studded with eyes, in front and behind. 

Rev 4:7 The first living creature was like a lion, the second like a bull, the third living creature had a human face, 
and the fourth living creature was like a flying eagle. 

Rev 4:8 Each of the four living creatures had six wings and was studded with eyes all the way round as well as 
inside; and day and night they never stopped singing: Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God, the Almighty; who was, 
and is and is to come”. 

Rev 4:9 Every time the living creatures glorified and honoured and gave thanks to the One sitting on the throne, 
who lives for ever and ever, 

Rev 4:10 the twenty-four elders prostrated themselves before him to worship the One who lives for ever and 
ever, and threw down their crowns in front of the throne, saying: 

Rev 4:1 1 You are worthy, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honour and power, for you made the whole 
universe; by your will, when it did not exist, it was created. 

Rev 5:1 I saw that in the right hand of the One sitting on the throne there was a scroll that was written on back 
and front and was sealed with seven seals. 

Rev 5:2 Then I saw a powerful angel who called with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and break 
its seals?”. 

Rev 5:3 But there was no one, in heaven or on the earth or under the earth, who was able to open the scroll and 
read it. 

Rev 5:4 I wept bitterly because nobody could be found to open the scroll and read it, 

Rev 5:5 but one of the elders said to me, “Do not weep. Look, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, 
has triumphed, and so he will open the scroll and its seven seals”. 

Rev 5:6 Then I saw, in the middle of the throne with its four living creatures and the circle of the elders, a Lamb 
standing that seemed to have been sacrificed; it had seven horns, and it had seven eyes, which are the seven 
Spirits that God has sent out over the whole world. 

Rev 5:7 The Lamb came forward to take the scroll from the right hand of the One sitting on the throne, 

Rev 5:8 and when he took it, the four living creatures prostrated themselves before him and with them the 
twenty-four elders; each one of them was holding a harp and had a golden bowl full of incense which are the 
prayers of the saints. 

Rev 5:9 They sang a new hymn: You are worthy to take the scroll and to break its seals, because you were 
sacrificed, and with your blood you bought people for God of every race, language, people and nation 
Rev 5:10 and made them a line of kings and priests for God, to rule the world. 



Rev 5:11 In my vision, I heard the sound of an immense number of angels gathered round the throne and the 
living creatures and the elders; there were ten thousand times ten thousand of them and thousands upon 
thousands, 

Rev 5:12 loudly chanting: Worthy is the Lamb that was sacrificed to receive power, riches, wisdom, strength, 
honour, glory and blessing. 

Rev 5:13 Then I heard all the living things in creation — everything that lives in heaven, and on earth, and under 
the earth, and in the sea, crying: To the One seated on the throne and to the Lamb, be all praise, honour, glory 
and power, for ever and ever. 

Rev 5:14 And the four living creatures said, “Amen”; and the elders prostrated themselves to worship. 

Rev 6:1 Then, in my vision, I saw the Lamb break one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living 
creatures shout in a voice like thunder, “Come!”. 

Rev 6:2 Immediately I saw a white horse appear, and its rider was holding a bow; he was given a victor’s crown 
and he went away, to go from victory to victory. 

Rev 6:3 When he broke the second seal, I heard the second living creature shout, “Come!”. 

Rev 6:4 And out came another horse, bright red, and its rider was given this duty: to take away peace from the 
earth and set people killing each other. He was given a huge sword. 

Rev 6:5 When he broke the third seal, I heard the third living creature shout, “Come!”. Immediately I saw a black 
horse appear, and its rider was holding a pair of scales; 

Rev 6:6 and I seemed to hear a voice shout from among the four living creatures and say, “A day’s wages for a 
quart of corn, and a day’s wages for three quarts of barley, but do not tamper with the oil or the wine”. 

Rev 6:7 When he broke the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature shout, “Come!”. 

Rev 6:8 Immediately I saw another horse appear, deathly pale, and its rider was called Death, and Hades 
followed at its heels. They were given authority over a quarter of the earth, to kill by the sword, by famine, by 
plague and through wild beasts. 

Rev 6:9 When he broke the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of all the people who had been killed 
on account of the Word of God, for witnessing to it. 

Rev 6:10 They shouted in a loud voice, “Holy, true Master, how much longer will you wait before you pass 
sentence and take vengeance for our death on the inhabitants of the earth?”. 

Rev 6:1 1 Each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to be patient a little longer, until the roll was 
completed of their fellow-servants and brothers who were still to be killed as they had been. 

Rev 6:12 In my vision, when he broke the sixth seal, there was a violent earthquake and the sun went as black 
as coarse sackcloth; the moon turned red as blood all over, 

Rev 6:13 and the stars of the sky fell onto the earth like figs dropping from a fig tree when a high wind shakes it; 
Rev 6:14 the sky disappeared like a scroll rolling up and all the mountains and islands were shaken from their 
places. 

Rev 6:15 Then all the kings of the earth, the governors and the commanders, the rich people and the men of 
influence, the whole population, slaves and citizens, hid in caverns and among the rocks of the mountains. 

Rev 6:16 They said to the mountains and the rocks, “Fall on us and hide us away from the One who sits on the 
throne and from the retribution of the Lamb. 

Rev 6:17 For the Great Day of his retribution has come, and who can face it?”. 

Rev 7:1 Next I saw four angels, standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds of the 
world to keep them from blowing over the land or the sea or any tree. 

Rev 7:2 Then I saw another angel rising where the sun rises, carrying the seal of the living God; he called in a 
powerful voice to the four angels whose duty was to devastate land and sea, 

Rev 7:3 “Wait before you do any damage on land or at sea or to the trees, until we have put the seal on the 
foreheads of the servants of our God”. 

Rev 7:4 And I heard how many had been sealed: a hundred and forty-four thousand, out of all the tribes of 
Israel. 

Rev 7:5 From the tribe of Judah, twelve thousand had been sealed; from the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand; 
from the tribe of Gad, twelve thousand; 

Rev 7:6 from the tribe of Asher, twelve thousand; from the tribe of Naphtali, twelve thousand; from the tribe of 
Manasseh, twelve thousand; 

Rev 7:7 from the tribe of Simeon, twelve thousand; from the tribe of Levi, twelve thousand; from the tribe of 
Issachar, twelve thousand; 

Rev 7:8 from the tribe of Zebulun, twelve thousand; and from the tribe of Benjamin, twelve thousand had been 
sealed. 

Rev 7:9 After that I saw that there was a huge number, impossible for anyone to count, of people from every 
nation, race, tribe and language; they were standing in front of the throne and in front of the Lamb, dressed in 
white robes and holding palms in their hands. They shouted in a loud voice, 



Rev 7:10 “Salvation to our God, who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!”. 

Rev 7:1 1 And all the angels who were standing in a circle round the throne, surrounding the elders and the four 
living creatures, prostrated themselves before the throne, and touched the ground with their foreheads, 
worshipping God 

Rev 7:12 with these words: Amen. Praise and glory and wisdom, thanksgiving and honour and power and 
strength to our God for ever and ever. Amen. 

Rev 7:13 One of the elders then spoke and asked me, “Who are these people, dressed in white robes, and 
where have they come from?”. 

Rev 7:14 I answered him, “You can tell me, sir”. Then he said, “These are the people who have been through the 
great trial; they have washed their robes white again in the blood of the Lamb. 

Rev 7:15 That is why they are standing in front of God’s throne and serving him day and night in his sanctuary; 
and the One who sits on the throne will spread his tent over them. 

Rev 7:16 They will never hunger or thirst again; sun and scorching wind will never plague them, 

Rev 7:17 because the Lamb who is at the heart of the throne will be their shepherd and will guide them to 
springs of living water; and God will wipe away all tears from their eyes”. 

Rev 8:1 The Lamb then broke the seventh seal, and there was silence in heaven for about half an hour. 

Rev 8:2 Next I saw seven trumpets being given to the seven angels who stand in the presence of God. 

Rev 8:3 Another angel, who had a golden censer, came and stood at the altar. A large quantity of incense was 
given to him to offer with the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar that stood in front of the throne; 

Rev 8:4 and so from the angel’s hand the smoke of the incense went up in the presence of God and with it the 
prayers of the saints. 

Rev 8:5 Then the angel took the censer and filled it from the fire of the altar, which he then hurled down onto the 
earth; immediately there came peals of thunder and flashes of lightning, and the earth shook. 

Rev 8:6 The seven angels that had the seven trumpets now made ready to sound them. 

Rev 8:7 The first blew his trumpet and, with that, hail and fire, mixed with blood, were hurled on the earth: a third 
of the earth was burnt up, and a third of all trees, and every blade of grass was burnt. 

Rev 8:8 The second angel blew his trumpet, and it was as though a great mountain blazing with fire was hurled 
into the sea: a third of the sea turned into blood, 

Rev 8:9 a third of all the living things in the sea were killed, and a third of all ships were destroyed. 

Rev 8:10 The third angel blew his trumpet, and a huge star fell from the sky, burning like a ball of fire, and it fell 
on a third of all rivers and on the springs of water; 

Rev 8:1 1 this was the star called Wormwood, and a third of all water turned to wormwood, so that many people 
died; the water had become so bitter. 

Rev 8:12 The fourth angel blew his trumpet, and a third of the sun and a third of the moon and a third of the 
stars were blasted, so that the light went out of a third of them and the day lost a third of its illumination, and 
likewise the night. 

Rev 8:13 In my vision, I heard an eagle, calling aloud as it flew high overhead, “Disaster, disaster, disaster, on 
all the people on earth at the sound of the other three trumpets which the three angels have yet to blow!”. 

Rev 9:1 Then the fifth angel blew his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from heaven onto the earth, and 
the angel was given the key to the shaft leading down to the Abyss. 

Rev 9:2 When he unlocked the shaft of the Abyss, smoke rose out of the Abyss like the smoke from a huge 
furnace so that the sun and the sky were darkened by the smoke from the Abyss, 

Rev 9:3 and out of the smoke dropped locusts onto the earth: they were given the powers that scorpions have 
on the earth: 

Rev 9:4 they were forbidden to harm any fields or crops or trees and told to attack only those people who were 
without God’s seal on their foreheads. 

Rev 9:5 They were not to kill them, but to give them anguish for five months, and the anguish was to be the 
anguish of a scorpion’s sting. 

Rev 9:6 When this happens, people will long for death and not find it anywhere; they will want to die and death 
will evade them. 

Rev 9:7 These locusts looked like horses armoured for battle; they had what looked like gold crowns on their 
heads, and their faces looked human, 

Rev 9:8 and their hair was like women’s hair, and teeth like lion’s teeth. 

Rev 9:9 They had body-armour like iron breastplates, and the noise of their wings sounded like the racket of 
chariots with many horses charging. 

Rev 9:10 Their tails were like scorpions’ tails, with stings, and with their tails they were able to torture people for 
five months. 

Rev 9:1 1 As their leader they had their emperor, the angel of the Abyss, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, 
and in Greek Apollyon. 



Rev 9:12 That was the first of the disasters; there are still two more to come. 

Rev 9:13 The sixth angel blew his trumpet, and I heard a single voice issuing from the four horns of the golden 
altar in God’s presence. 

Rev 9:14 It spoke to the sixth angel with the trumpet, and said, “Release the four angels that are chained up at 
the great river Euphrates”. 

Rev 9:15 These four angels had been ready for this hour of this day of this month of this year, and ready to 
destroy a third of the human race. 

Rev 9:16 I learnt how many there were in their army: twice ten thousand times ten thousand mounted men. 

Rev 9:17 In my vision I saw the horses, and the riders with their breastplates of flame colour, hyacinth-blue and 
sulphur-yellow; the horses had lions’ heads, and fire, smoke and sulphur were coming from their mouths. 

Rev 9:18 It was by these three plagues, the fire, the smoke and the sulphur coming from their mouths, that the 
one third of the human race was killed. 

Rev 9:19 All the horses’ power was in their mouths and their tails: their tails were like snakes, and had heads 
which inflicted wounds. 

Rev 9:20 But the rest of the human race, who escaped death by these plagues, refused either to abandon their 
own handiwork or to stop worshipping devils, the idols made of gold, silver, bronze, stone and wood that can 
neither see nor hear nor move. 

Rev 9:21 Nor did they give up their murdering, or witchcraft, or fornication or stealing. 

Rev 10:1 Then I saw another powerful angel coming down from heaven, wrapped in cloud, with a rainbow over 
his head; his face was like the sun, and his legs were pillars of fire. 

Rev 1 0:2 In his hand he had a small scroll, unrolled; he put his right foot in the sea and his left foot on the land 
Rev 1 0:3 and he shouted so loud, it was like a lion roaring. At this, the seven claps of thunder made themselves 
heard 

Rev 10:4 and when the seven thunderclaps had sounded, I was preparing to write, when I heard a voice from 
heaven say to me, “Keep the words of the seven thunderclaps secret and do not write them down”. 

Rev 10:5 Then the angel that I had seen, standing on the sea and the land, raised his right hand to heaven, 

Rev 10:6 and swore by him who lives for ever and ever, and made heaven and all that it contains, and earth and 
all it contains, and the sea and all it contains, “The time of waiting is over; 

Rev 10:7 at the time when the seventh angel is heard sounding his trumpet, the mystery of God will be fulfilled, 
just as he announced in the gospel to his servants the prophets”. 

Rev 10:8 Then I heard the voice I had heard from heaven speaking to me again. “Go”, it said, “and take that 
open scroll from the hand of the angel standing on sea and land”. 

Rev 10:9 I went to the angel and asked him to give me the small scroll, and he said, “Take it and eat it; it will 
turn your stomach sour, but it will taste as sweet as honey”. 

Rev 10:10 Sol took it out of the angel’s hand, and I ate it and it tasted sweet as honey, but when I had eaten it 
my stomach turned sour. 

Rev 10:11 Then I was told, “You are to prophesy again, this time against many different nations and countries 
and languages and kings”. 

Rev 11:1 Then I was given a long cane like a measuring rod, and I was told, “Get up and measure God’s 
sanctuary, and the altar, and the people who worship there; 

Rev 1 1 :2 but exclude the outer court and do not measure it, because it has been handed over to gentiles — they 
will trample on the holy city for forty-two months. 

Rev 1 1 :3 But I shall send my two witnesses to prophesy for twelve hundred and sixty days, wearing sackcloth. 
Rev 1 1 :4 These are the two olive trees and the two lamps in attendance on the Lord of the world. 

Rev 1 1 :5 Fire comes from their mouths and consumes their enemies if anyone tries to harm them; and anyone 
who tries to harm them will certainly be killed in this way. 

Rev 1 1 :6 They have the power to lock up the sky so that it does not rain as long as they are prophesying; they 
have the power to turn water into blood and strike the whole world with any plague as often as they like. 

Rev 1 1 :7 When they have completed their witnessing, the beast that comes out of the Abyss is going to make 
war on them and overcome them and kill them. 

Rev 1 1 :8 Their corpses lie in the main street of the great city known by the symbolic names Sodom and Egypt, 
in which their Lord was crucified. 

Rev 1 1 :9 People of every race, tribe, language and nation stare at their corpses, for three-and-a-half days, not 
letting them be buried, 

Rev 11:10 and the people of the world are glad about it and celebrate the event by giving presents to each 
other, because these two prophets have been a plague to the people of the world”. 

Rev 11:11 After the three-and-a-half days, God breathed life into them and they stood up on their feet, and 
everybody who saw it happen was terrified; 

Rev 11:12 then I heard a loud voice from heaven say to them, “Come up here”, and while their enemies were 



watching, they went up to heaven in a cloud. 

Rev 11:13 Immediately, there was a violent earthquake, and a tenth of the city collapsed; seven thousand 
persons were killed in the earthquake, and the survivors, overcome with fear, could only praise the God of 
heaven. 

Rev 11:14 That was the second of the disasters; the third is to come quickly after it. 

Rev 11:15 Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet, and voices could be heard shouting in heaven, calling, 

“The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and his Christ, and he will reign for ever and 
ever”. 

Rev 11:16 The twenty-four elders, enthroned in the presence of God, prostrated themselves and touched the 
ground with their foreheads worshipping God 

Rev 11:17 with these words, “We give thanks to you, Almighty Lord God, He who is, He who was, for assuming 
your great power and beginning your reign. 

Rev 11:18 The nations were in uproar and now the time has come for your retribution, and for the dead to be 
judged, and for your servants the prophets, for the saints and for those who fear your name, small and great 
alike, to be rewarded. The time has come to destroy those who are destroying the earth”. 

Rev 11:19 Then the sanctuary of God in heaven opened, and the ark of the covenant could be seen inside it. 
Then came flashes of lightning, peals of thunder and an earthquake and violent hail. 

Rev 12:1 Now a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman, robed with the sun, standing on the moon, and on 
her head a crown of twelve stars. 

Rev 12:2 She was pregnant, and in labour, crying aloud in the pangs of childbirth. 

Rev 12:3 Then a second sign appeared in the sky: there was a huge red dragon with seven heads and ten 
horns, and each of the seven heads crowned with a coronet. 

Rev 12:4 Its tail swept a third of the stars from the sky and hurled them to the ground, and the dragon stopped 
in front of the woman as she was at the point of giving birth, so that it could eat the child as soon as it was born. 
Rev 12:5 The woman was delivered of a boy, the son who was to rule all the nations with an iron sceptre, and 
the child was taken straight up to God and to his throne, 

Rev 12:6 while the woman escaped into the desert, where God had prepared a place for her to be looked after 
for twelve hundred and sixty days. 

Rev 12:7 And now war broke out in heaven, when Michael with his angels attacked the dragon. The dragon 
fought back with his angels, 

Rev 12:8 but they were defeated and driven out of heaven. 

Rev 12:9 The great dragon, the primeval serpent, known as the devil or Satan, who had led all the world astray, 
was hurled down to the earth and his angels were hurled down with him. 

Rev 12:10 Then I heard a voice shout from heaven, “Salvation and power and empire for ever have been won 
by our God, and all authority for his Christ, now that the accuser, who accused our brothers day and night before 
our God, has been brought down. 

Rev 12:11 They have triumphed over him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word to which they bore witness, 
because even in the face of death they did not cling to life. 

Rev 12:12 So let the heavens rejoice and all who live there; but for you, earth and sea, disaster is coming - 
because the devil has gone down to you in a rage, knowing that he has little time left”. 

Rev 12:13 As soon as the dragon found himself hurled down to the earth, he sprang in pursuit of the woman, 
the mother of the male child, 

Rev 12:14 but she was given a pair of the great eagle’s wings to fly away from the serpent into the desert, to the 
place where she was to be looked after for a time, two times and half a time. 

Rev 12:15 So the serpent vomited water from his mouth, like a river, after the woman, to sweep her away in the 
current, 

Rev 12:16 but the earth came to her rescue; it opened its mouth and swallowed the river spewed from the 
dragon’s mouth. 

Rev 12:17 Then the dragon was enraged with the woman and went away to make war on the rest of her 
children, who obey God’s commandments and have in themselves the witness of Jesus. 

Rev 12:18 And I took my stand on the seashore. 

Rev 13:1 Then I saw a beast emerge from the sea: it had seven heads and ten horns, with a coronet on each of 
its ten horns, and its heads were marked with blasphemous titles. 

Rev 1 3:2 I saw that the beast was like a leopard, with paws like a bear and a mouth like a lion; the dragon had 
handed over to it his own power and his throne and his immense authority. 

Rev 13:3 I saw that one of its heads seemed to have had a fatal wound but that this deadly injury had healed 
and the whole world had marvelled and followed the beast. 

Rev 13:4 They prostrated themselves in front of the dragon because he had given the beast his authority; and 
they prostrated themselves in front of the beast, saying, “Who can compare with the beast? Who can fight 



against it?”. 

Rev 13:5 The beast was allowed to mouth its boasts and blasphemies and to be active for forty-two months; 

Rev 13:6 and it mouthed its blasphemies against God, against his name, his heavenly Tent and all those who 
are sheltered there. 

Rev 13:7 It was allowed to make war against the saints and conquer them, and given power over every race, 
people, language and nation; 

Rev 13:8 and all people of the world will worship it, that is, everybody whose name has not been written down 
since the foundation of the world in the sacrificial Lamb’s book of life. 

Rev 13:9 Let anyone who can hear, listen: 

Rev 13:10 Those for captivity to captivity; those for death by the sword to death by the sword. This is why the 
saints must have perseverance and faith. 

Rev 13:11 Then I saw a second beast, emerging from the ground; it had two horns like a lamb, but made a 
noise like a dragon. 

Rev 13:12 This second beast exercised all the power of the first beast, on its behalf making the world and all its 
people worship the first beast, whose deadly injury had healed. 

Rev 13:13 And it worked great miracles, even to calling down fire from heaven onto the earth while people 
watched. 

Rev 13:14 Through the miracles which it was allowed to do on behalf of the first beast, it was able to lead astray 
the people of the world and persuade them to put up a statue in honour of the beast that had been wounded by 
the sword and still lived. 

Rev 13:15 It was allowed to breathe life into this statue, so that the statue of the beast was able to speak, and to 
have anyone who refused to worship the statue of the beast put to death. 

Rev 13:16 It compelled everyone — small and great alike, rich and poor, slave and citizen — to be branded on 
the right hand or on the forehead, 

Rev 13:17 and made it illegal for anyone to buy or sell anything unless he had been branded with the name of 
the beast or with the number of its name. 

Rev 13:18 There is need for shrewdness here: anyone clever may interpret the number of the beast: it is the 
number of a human being, the number 666. 

Rev 14:1 Next in my vision I saw Mount Zion, and standing on it the Lamb who had with him a hundred and 
forty-four thousand people, all with his name and his Father’s name written on their foreheads. 

Rev 14:2 I heard a sound coming out of heaven like the sound of the ocean or the roar of thunder; it was like the 
sound of harpists playing their harps. 

Rev 14:3 There before the throne they were singing a new hymn in the presence of the four living creatures and 
the elders, a hymn that could be learnt only by the hundred and forty-four thousand who had been redeemed 
from the world. 

Rev 14:4 These are the sons who have kept their virginity and not been defiled with women; they follow the 
Lamb wherever he goes; they, out of all people, have been redeemed to be the first-fruits for God and for the 
Lamb. 

Rev 14:5 No lie was found in their mouths and no fault can be found in them. 

Rev 14:6 Then I saw another angel, flying high overhead, sent to announce the gospel of eternity to all who live 
on the earth, every nation, race, language and tribe. 

Rev 14:7 He was calling, “Fear God and glorify him, because the time has come for him to sit in judgement; 
worship the maker of heaven and earth and sea and the springs of water”. 

Rev 14:8 A second angel followed him, calling, “Babylon has fallen, Babylon the Great has fallen, Babylon which 
gave the whole world the wine of retribution to drink”. 

Rev 14:9 A third angel followed, shouting aloud, “All those who worship the beast and his statue, or have had 
themselves branded on the hand or forehead, 

Rev 14:10 will be made to drink the wine of God’s fury which is ready, undiluted, in his cup of retribution; in fire 
and brimstone they will be tortured in the presence of the holy angels and the Lamb 

Rev 14:11 and the smoke of their torture will rise for ever and ever. There will be no respite, night or day, for 
those who worship the beast or its statue or accept branding with its name”. 

Rev 14:12 This is why there must be perseverance in the saints who keep the commandments of God and faith 
in Jesus. 

Rev 14:13 Then I heard a voice from heaven say to me, “Write down: Blessed are those who die in the Lord! 
Blessed indeed, the Spirit says; now they can rest for ever after their work, since their good deeds go with them”. 
Rev 14:14 Now in my vision I saw a white cloud and, sitting on it, one like a son of man with a gold crown on his 
head and a sharp sickle in his hand. 

Rev 14:15 Then another angel came out of the sanctuary and shouted at the top of his voice to the one sitting 
on the cloud, “Ply your sickle and reap: harvest time has come and the harvest of the earth is ripe”. 



Rev 14:16 Then the one sitting on the cloud set his sickle to work on the earth, and the harvest of earth was 
reaped. 

Rev 14:17 Another angel, who also carried a sharp sickle, came out of the temple in heaven, 

Rev 14:18 and the angel in charge of the fire left the altar and shouted at the top of his voice to the one with the 
sharp sickle, “Put your sickle in, and harvest the bunches from the vine of the earth; all its grapes are ripe”. 

Rev 14:19 So the angel set his sickle to work on the earth and harvested the whole vintage of the earth and put 
it into a huge winepress, the winepress of God’s anger, 

Rev 1 4:20 outside the city, where it was trodden until the blood that came out of the winepress was up to the 
horses’ bridles as far away as sixteen hundred furlongs. 

Rev 15:1 And I saw in heaven another sign, great and wonderful: seven angels were bringing the seven plagues 
that are the last of all, because they exhaust the anger of God. 

Rev 15:2 I seemed to be looking at a sea of crystal suffused with fire, and standing by the lake of glass, those 
who had fought against the beast and won, and against his statue and the number which is his name. They all 
had harps from God, 

Rev 1 5:3 and they were singing the hymn of Moses, the servant of God, and the hymn of the Lamb: How great 
and wonderful are all your works, Lord God Almighty; upright and true are all your ways, King of nations. 

Rev 1 5:4 Who does not revere and glorify your name, O Lord? For you alone are holy, and all nations will come 
and adore you for the many acts of saving justice you have shown. 

Rev 15:5 After this, in my vision, the sanctuary, the tent of the Testimony, opened in heaven, 

Rev 15:6 and out came the seven angels with the seven plagues, wearing pure white linen, fastened round their 
waists with belts of gold. 

Rev 15:7 One of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls filled with the anger of God 
who lives for ever and ever. 

Rev 1 5:8 The smoke from the glory and the power of God filled the temple so that no one could go into it until 
the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed. 

Rev 16:1 Then I heard a loud voice from the sanctuary calling to the seven angels, “Go, and empty the seven 
bowls of God’s anger over the earth”. 

Rev 1 6:2 The first angel went and emptied his bowl over the earth; at once, on all the people who had been 
branded with the mark of the beast and had worshipped its statue, there came disgusting and virulent sores. 

Rev 16:3 The second angel emptied his bowl over the sea, and it turned to blood, like the blood of a corpse, and 
every living creature in the sea died. 

Rev 16:4 The third angel emptied his bowl into the rivers and springs of water and they turned into blood. 

Rev 16:5 Then I heard the angel of water say, “You are the Upright One, He who is, He who was, the Holy One, 
for giving this verdict: 

Rev 16:6 they spilt the blood of the saints and the prophets, and blood is what you have given them to drink; it is 
what they deserve”. 

Rev 16:7 And I heard the altar itself say, “Truly, Lord God Almighty, the punishments you give are true and just”. 
Rev 1 6:8 The fourth angel emptied his bowl over the sun and it was made to scorch people with its flames; 

Rev 16:9 but though people were scorched by the fierce heat of it, they cursed the name of God who had the 
power to cause such plagues, and they would not repent and glorify him. 

Rev 16:10 The fifth angel emptied his bowl over the throne of the beast and its whole empire was plunged into 
darkness. People were biting their tongues for pain, 

Rev 16:11 but instead of repenting for what they had done, they cursed the God of heaven because of their 
pains and sores. 

Rev 16:12 The sixth angel emptied his bowl over the great river Euphrates; all the water dried up so that a way 
was made for the kings of the East to come in. 

Rev 16:13 Then from the jaws of dragon and beast and false prophet I saw three foul spirits come; they looked 
like frogs 

Rev 16:14 and in fact were demon spirits, able to work miracles, going out to all the kings of the world to call 
them together for the war of the Great Day of God the Almighty. - 

Rev 16:15 Look, I shall come like a thief. Blessed is anyone who has kept watch, and has kept his clothes on, 
so that he does not go out naked and expose his shame. - 

Rev 16:16 They called the kings together at the place called, in Hebrew, Armageddon. 

Rev 16:17 The seventh angel emptied his bowl into the air, and a great voice boomed out from the sanctuary, 
“The end has come”. 

Rev 16:18 Then there were flashes of lightning and peals of thunder and a violent earthquake, unparalleled 
since humanity first came into existence. 

Rev 16:19 The Great City was split into three parts and the cities of the world collapsed; Babylon the Great was 
not forgotten: God made her drink the full winecup of his retribution. 



Rev 16:20 Every island vanished and the mountains disappeared; 

Rev 16:21 and hail, with great hailstones weighing a talent each, fell from the sky on the people. They cursed 
God for sending a plague of hail; it was the most terrible plague. 

Rev 17:1 One of the seven angels that had the seven bowls came to speak to me, and said, “Come here and I 
will show you the punishment of the great prostitute who is enthroned beside abundant waters, 

Rev 17:2 with whom all the kings of the earth have prostituted themselves, and who has made all the population 
of the world drunk with the wine of her adultery”. 

Rev 17:3 He took me in spirit to a desert, and there I saw a woman riding a scarlet beast which had seven 
heads and ten horns and had blasphemous titles written all over it. 

Rev 17:4 The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet and glittered with gold and jewels and pearls, and she 
was holding a gold winecup filled with the disgusting filth of her prostitution; 

Rev 17:5 on her forehead was written a name, a cryptic name: “Babylon the Great, the mother of all the 
prostitutes and all the filthy practices on the earth”. 

Rev 17:6 I saw that she was drunk, drunk with the blood of the saints, and the blood of the martyrs of Jesus; 
and when I saw her, I was completely mystified. 

Rev 17:7 The angel said to me, “Do you not understand? I will tell you the meaning of this woman, and of the 
beast she is riding, with the seven heads and the ten horns. 

Rev 17:8 “The beast you have seen was once alive and is alive no longer; it is yet to come up from the Abyss, 
but only to go to its destruction. And the people of the world, whose names have not been written since the 
beginning of the world in the book of life, will be astonished when they see how the beast was once alive and is 
alive no longer, and is still to come. 

Rev 17:9 “This calls for shrewdness. The seven heads are the seven hills, on which the woman is sitting. 

Rev 17:10 The seven heads are also seven emperors. Five of them have already gone, one is here now, and 
one is yet to come; once here, he must stay for a short while. 

Rev 17:11 The beast, who was alive and is alive no longer, is at the same time the eighth and one of the seven, 
and he is going to his destruction. 

Rev 17:12 “The ten horns which you saw are ten kings who have not yet been given their royal power but will 

have royal authority only for a single hour and in association with the beast. 

Rev 17:13 They are all of one mind in putting their strength and their powers at the beast’s disposal, 

Rev 17:14 and they will go to war against the Lamb; but because the Lamb is Lord of lords and King of kings, he 

will defeat them, he and his followers, the called, the chosen, the trustworthy”. 

Rev 17:15 The angel continued, “The waters you saw, beside which the prostitute was sitting, are all the 
peoples, the populations, the nations and the languages. 

Rev 17:16 But the ten horns and the beast will turn against the prostitute, and tear off her clothes and leave her 
stark naked; then they will eat her flesh and burn the remains in the fire. 

Rev 17:17 In fact, God has influenced their minds to do what he intends, to agree together to put their royal 
powers at the beast’s disposal until the time when God’s words shall be fulfilled. 

Rev 17:18 The woman you saw is the great city which has authority over all the rulers on earth”. 

Rev 18:1 After this, I saw another angel come down from heaven, with great authority given to him; the earth 
shone with his glory. 

Rev 18:2 At the top of his voice he shouted, “Babylon has fallen, Babylon the Great has fallen, and has become 
the haunt of devils and a lodging for every foul spirit and dirty, loathsome bird. 

Rev 18:3 All the nations have drunk deep of the wine of her prostitution; every king on the earth has prostituted 
himself with her, and every merchant grown rich through her debauchery”. 

Rev 18:4 Another voice spoke from heaven; I heard it say, “Come out, my people, away from her, so that you do 
not share in her crimes and have the same plagues to bear. 

Rev 18:5 Her sins have reached up to the sky, and God has her crimes in mind: treat her as she has treated 
others. 

Rev 18:6 She must be paid double the amount she exacted. She is to have a doubly strong cup of her own 
mixture. 

Rev 1 8:7 Every one of her pomps and orgies is to be matched by a torture or an agony. I am enthroned as 
queen, she thinks; I am no widow and will never know bereavement. 

Rev 1 8:8 For that, in one day, the plagues will fall on her: disease and mourning and famine. She will be burned 
to the ground. The Lord God who has condemned her is mighty”. 

Rev 18:9 “There will be mourning and weeping for her by the kings of the earth who have prostituted themselves 
with her and held orgies with her. They see the smoke as she burns, 

Rev 18:10 while they keep at a safe distance through fear of her anguish. They will say: Mourn, mourn for this 
great city, Babylon, so powerful a city, in one short hour your doom has come upon you. 

Rev 18:11 “There will be weeping and distress over her among all the traders of the earth when no one is left to 



buy their cargoes of goods; 

Rev 18:12 their stocks of gold and silver, jewels and pearls, linen and purple and silks and scarlet; all the 
sandalwood, every piece in ivory or fine wood, in bronze or iron or marble; 

Rev 18:13 the cinnamon and spices, the myrrh and ointment and incense; wine, oil, flour and corn; their stocks 
of cattle, sheep, horses and chariots, their slaves and their human cargo. 

Rev 18:14 “All the fruits you had set your hearts on have failed you; gone for ever, never to return again, is your 
life of magnificence and ease. 

Rev 18:15 The traders who had made a fortune out of her will be standing at a safe distance through fear of her 
anguish, mourning and weeping. 

Rev 18:16 They will be saying: Mourn, mourn for this great city; for all the linen and purple and scarlet that you 
wore, for all your finery of gold and jewels and pearls; 

Rev 18:17 your huge riches are all destroyed within a single hour”. All the captains and seafaring men, sailors 
and all those who make a living from the sea kept a safe distance, 

Rev 18:18 watching the smoke as she burned, and crying out, “Has there ever been a city as great as this!”. 

Rev 18:19 They threw dust on their heads and said, with tears and groans: “Mourn, mourn for this great city 
whose lavish living has made a fortune for every owner of a sea-going ship, ruined within a single hour. 

Rev 18:20 “Now heaven, celebrate her downfall, and all you saints, apostles and prophets: God has given 
judgement for you against her”. 

Rev 18:21 Then a powerful angel picked up a boulder like a great millstone, and as he hurled it into the sea, he 
said, “That is how the great city of Babylon is going to be hurled down, never to be seen again. 

Rev 18:22 Never again in you will be heard the song of harpists and minstrels, the music of flute and trumpet; 
never again will craftsmen of every skill be found in you or the sound of the handmill be heard; 

Rev 1 8:23 never again will shine the light of the lamp in you, never again will be heard in you the voices of 
bridegroom and bride. Your traders were the princes of the earth, all the nations were led astray by your sorcery. 
Rev 1 8:24 In her was found the blood of prophets and saints, and all the blood that was ever shed on earth”. 

Rev 19:1 After this I heard what seemed to be the great sound of a huge crowd in heaven, singing, “Alleluia! 
Salvation and glory and power to our God! 

Rev 19:2 He judges fairly, he punishes justly, and he has condemned the great prostitute who corrupted the 
earth with her prostitution; he has avenged the blood of his servants which she shed”. 

Rev 1 9:3 And again they sang, “Alleluia! The smoke of her will rise for ever and ever”. 

Rev 19:4 Then the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures threw themselves down and worshipped God 
seated on his throne, and they cried, “Amen, Alleluia”. 

Rev 19:5 Then a voice came from the throne; it said, “Praise our God, you servants of his and those who fear 
him, small and great alike”. 

Rev 19:6 And I heard what seemed to be the voices of a huge crowd, like the sound of the ocean or the great 
roar of thunder, answering, “Alleluia! The reign of the Lord our God Almighty has begun; 

Rev 1 9:7 let us be glad and joyful and give glory to God, because this is the time for the marriage of the Lamb. 
Rev 19:8 His bride is ready, and she has been able to dress herself in dazzling white linen, because her linen is 
made of the good deeds of the saints”. 

Rev 19:9 The angel said, “Write this, ‘Blessed are those who are invited to the wedding feast of the Lamb’, “ and 
he added, “These words of God are true”. 

Rev 19:10 Then I knelt at his feet to worship him, but he said to me, “Never do that: I am your fellow-servant and 
the fellow-servant of all your brothers who have in themselves the witness of Jesus. God alone you must 
worship”. The witness of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. 

Rev 19:11 And now I saw heaven open, and a white horse appear; its rider was called Trustworthy and True; in 
uprightness he judges and makes war. 

Rev 19:12 His eyes were flames of fire, and he was crowned with many coronets; the name written on him was 
known only to himself, 

Rev 19:13 his cloak was soaked in blood. He is known by the name, The Word of God. 

Rev 19:14 Behind him, dressed in linen of dazzling white, rode the armies of heaven on white horses. 

Rev 19:15 From his mouth came a sharp sword with which to strike the unbelievers; he is the one who will rule 
them with an iron sceptre, and tread out the wine of Almighty God’s fierce retribution. 

Rev 19:16 On his cloak and on his thigh a name was written: King of kings and Lord of lords. 

Rev 19:17 I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he shouted aloud to all the birds that were flying high 

overhead in the sky, “Come here. Gather together at God’s great feast. 

Rev 19:18 You will eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of great generals and heroes, the flesh of horses and 

their riders and of all kinds of people, citizens and slaves, small and great alike”. 

Rev 19:19 Then I saw the beast, with all the kings of the earth and their armies, gathered together to fight the 
Rider and his army. 



Rev 19:20 But the beast was taken prisoner, together with the false prophet who had worked miracles on the 
beast’s behalf and by them had deceived those who had accepted branding with the mark of the beast and those 
who had worshipped his statue. These two were hurled alive into the fiery lake of burning sulphur. 

Rev 1 9:21 All the rest were killed by the sword of the Rider, which came out of his mouth, and all the birds 
glutted themselves with their flesh. 

Rev 20:1 Then I saw an angel come down from heaven with the key of the Abyss in his hand and an enormous 
chain. 

Rev 20:2 He overpowered the dragon, that primeval serpent which is the devil and Satan, and chained him up 
for a thousand years. 

Rev 20:3 He hurled him into the Abyss and shut the entrance and sealed it over him, to make sure he would not 
lead the nations astray again until the thousand years had passed. At the end of that time he must be released, 
but only for a short while. 

Rev 20:4 Then I saw thrones, where they took their seats, and on them was conferred the power to give 
judgement. I saw the souls of all who had been beheaded for having witnessed for Jesus and for having 
preached God’s word, and those who refused to worship the beast or his statue and would not accept the brand- 
mark on their foreheads or hands; they came to life, and reigned with Christ for a thousand years. 

Rev 20:5 The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were over; this is the first 
resurrection. 

Rev 20:6 Blessed and holy are those who share in the first resurrection; the second death has no power over 
them but they will be priests of God and of Christ and reign with him for a thousand years. 

Rev 20:7 When the thousand years are over, Satan will be released from his prison 

Rev 20:8 and will come out to lead astray all the nations in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, and 
mobilise them for war, his armies being as many as the sands of the sea. 

Rev 20:9 They came swarming over the entire country and besieged the camp of the saints, which is the 
beloved City. But fire rained down on them from heaven and consumed them. 

Rev 20: 1 0 Then the devil, who led them astray, was hurled into the lake of fire and sulphur, where the beast and 
the false prophet are, and their torture will not come to an end, day or night, for ever and ever. 

Rev 20:11 Then I saw a great white throne and the One who was sitting on it. In his presence, earth and sky 
vanished, leaving no trace. 

Rev 20:12 I saw the dead, great and small alike, standing in front of his throne while the books lay open. And 
another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged from what was written in the 
books, as their deeds deserved. 

Rev 20:13 The sea gave up all the dead who were in it; 

Rev 20:14 Death and Hades were emptied of the dead that were in them; and every one was judged as his 
deeds deserved. Then Death and Hades were hurled into the burning lake. This burning lake is the second 
death; 

Rev 20:15 and anybody whose name could not be found written in the book of life was hurled into the burning 
lake. 

Rev 21:1 Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth; the first heaven and the first earth had disappeared now, 
and there was no longer any sea. 

Rev 21 :2 I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride 
dressed for her husband. 

Rev 21 :3 Then I heard a loud voice call from the throne, “Look, here God lives among human beings. He will 
make his home among them; they will be his people, and he will be their God, God-with-them. 

Rev 21 :4 He will wipe away all tears from their eyes; there will be no more death, and no more mourning or 
sadness or pain. The world of the past has gone”. 

Rev 21 :5 Then the One sitting on the throne spoke. “Look, I am making the whole of creation new. Write this, 
‘What I am saying is trustworthy and will come true’. 

Rev 21 :6 Then he said to me, “It has already happened. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the 
End. I will give water from the well of life free to anybody who is thirsty; 

Rev 21 :7 anyone who proves victorious will inherit these things; and I will be his God and he will be my son. 

Rev 21 :8 But the legacy for cowards, for those who break their word, or worship obscenities, for murderers and 
the sexually immoral, and for sorcerers, worshippers of false gods or any other sort of liars, is the second death 
in the burning lake of sulphur”. 

Rev 21 :9 One of the seven angels that had the seven bowls full of the seven final plagues came to speak to me 
and said, “Come here and I will show you the bride that the Lamb has married”. 

Rev 21:10 In the spirit, he carried me to the top of a very high mountain, and showed me Jerusalem, the holy 
city, coming down out of heaven from God. 

Rev 21:11 It had all the glory of God and glittered like some precious jewel of crystal-clear diamond. 



Rev 21:12 Its wall was of a great height and had twelve gates; at each of the twelve gates there was an angel, 
and over the gates were written the names of the twelve tribes of Israel; 

Rev 21:13 on the east there were three gates, on the north three gates, on the south three gates, and on the 
west three gates. 

Rev 21:14 The city walls stood on twelve foundation stones, each one of which bore the name of one of the 
twelve apostles of the Lamb. 

Rev 21:15 The angel that was speaking to me was carrying a gold measuring rod to measure the city and its 
gates and wall. 

Rev 21:16 The plan of the city is perfectly square, its length the same as its breadth. He measured the city with 
his rod and it was twelve thousand furlongs, equal in length and in breadth, and equal in height. 

Rev 21:17 He measured its wall, and this was a hundred and forty-four cubits high — by human measurements. 
Rev 21:18 The wall was built of diamond, and the city of pure gold, like clear glass. 

Rev 21:19 The foundations of the city wall were faced with all kinds of precious stone: the first with diamond, the 
second lapis lazuli, the third turquoise, the fourth crystal, 

Rev 21 :20 the fifth agate, the sixth ruby, the seventh gold quartz, the eighth malachite, the ninth topaz, the tenth 
emerald, the eleventh sapphire and the twelfth amethyst. 

Rev 21 :21 The twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate being made of a single pearl, and the main street of 
the city was pure gold, transparent as glass. 

Rev 21 :22 I could not see any temple in the city since the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb were themselves 
the temple, 

Rev 21 :23 and the city did not need the sun or the moon for light, since it was lit by the radiant glory of God, and 
the Lamb was a lighted torch for it. 

Rev 21 :24 The nations will come to its light and the kings of the earth will bring it their treasures. 

Rev 21 :25 Its gates will never be closed by day — and there will be no night there- 
Rev 21 :26 and the nations will come, bringing their treasure and their wealth. 

Rev 21 :27 Nothing unclean may come into it: no one who does what is loathsome or false, but only those who 
are listed in the Lamb’s book of life. 

Rev 22:1 Then the angel showed me the river of life, rising from the throne of God and of the Lamb and flowing 
crystal-clear. 

Rev 22:2 Down the middle of the city street, on either bank of the river were the trees of life, which bear twelve 
crops of fruit in a year, one in each month, and the leaves of which are the cure for the nations. 

Rev 22:3 The curse of destruction will be abolished. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be in the city; his 
servants will worship him, 

Rev 22:4 they will see him face to face, and his name will be written on their foreheads. 

Rev 22:5 And night will be abolished; they will not need lamplight or sunlight, because the Lord God will be 
shining on them. They will reign for ever and ever. 

Rev 22:6 The angel said to me, “All that you have written is sure and will come true: the Lord God who inspires 
the prophets has sent his angel to reveal to his servants what is soon to take place. 

Rev 22:7 I am coming soon!”. Blessed are those who keep the prophetic message of this book. 

Rev 22:8 I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. When I had heard and seen them all, I knelt at 
the feet of the angel who had shown them to me, to worship him; 

Rev 22:9 but he said, “Do no such thing: I am your fellow-servant and the fellow-servant of your brothers the 
prophets and those who keep the message of this book. God alone you must worship”. 

Rev 22:10 This, too, he said to me, “Do not keep the prophecies in this book a secret, because the Time is 
close. 

Rev 22:11 Meanwhile let the sinner continue sinning, and the unclean continue to be unclean; let the upright 
continue in his uprightness, and those who are holy continue to be holy. 

Rev 22:12 Look, I am coming soon, and my reward is with me, to repay everyone as their deeds deserve. 

Rev 22:13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End. 

Rev 22:14 Blessed are those who will have washed their robes clean, so that they will have the right to feed on 
the tree of life and can come through the gates into the city. 

Rev 22:15 Others must stay outside: dogs, fortune-tellers, and the sexually immoral, murderers, idolaters, and 
everyone of false speech and false life”. 

Rev 22:16 I, Jesus, have sent my angel to attest these things to you for the sake of the churches. I am the sprig 
from the root of David and the bright star of the morning. 

Rev 22:17 The Spirit and the Bride say, “Come!”. Let everyone who listens answer, “Come!”. Then let all who are 
thirsty come: all who want it may have the water of life, and have it free. 

Rev 22:18 This is my solemn attestation to all who hear the prophecies in this book: if anyone adds anything to 
them, God will add to him every plague mentioned in the book; 



Rev 22: 1 9 if anyone cuts anything out of the prophecies in this book, God will cut off his share of the tree of life 
and of the holy city, which are described in the book. 

Rev 22:20 The one who attests these things says: I am indeed coming soon. Amen; come, Lord Jesus. 

Rev 22:21 May the grace of the Lord Jesus be with you all. Amen. 



